why in the world should we assume that
the topic of your book the title of your
book refers to something that is real
and
and if it's real why aren't we attending
to it and why is it important yeah well
first of all it's real
um because in all 56 of the largest
developed Nations boys are falling
behind girls in almost every single
academic subject including reading and
writing which are the two biggest
predictors of success or failure as you
can probably imagine
um and so and and boys who do badly in
those subjects are much more likely to
drop out of high school and boys in
general are much more likely to drop out
of high school especially in the United
States and boys who drop out of high
school are more than 20 percent likely
to be unemployed in their 20s this is a
statistic before covid when the
unemployment rate in the United States
was 3.4 versus more than 20 percent for
for boys
[Music]
thank you
hello everyone I'm pleased to be talking
today with Dr Warren Farrell who I spoke
with three years ago almost to the day
about his previous book why why men earn
more we're going to talk today about the
boy crisis which was published just
after our last interview so that's in
2018. Dr Warren Farrell was chosen by
the financial times as one of the
world's top 100 thought leaders his
books have been published in more than
50 countries and in 19 different
languages they include the New York
Times bestseller why men are the way
they are which must be a very thick book
plus the international bestseller the
myth of male power is most recent is the
boy crisis we mentioned why men earn
more as well which is a very good book
his most recent is the boy crisis as I
said 2018 co-authored with John Gray the
boy crisis was chosen as a finalist for
the forward Indies award which is the
independent Publishers award Dr Farrell
has been a Pioneer in both the women's
movement elected three times to the
board of the National Organization of
Women in New York City and the men's
movement called by GQ Magazine the
Martin Luther King of the men's movement
he conducts couples Communications
workshops Nationwide as he's appeared on
over a thousand TV shows that's way too
many TV shows and has been interviewed
by Oprah Barbara Walters Peter Jennings
Katie Couric Larry King Tucker Carlson
Regis Philbin
and Charlie Rose
is frequently written for and been
featured in The New York Times
and other major Publications worldwide
he has two daughters lives with his wife
in Mill Valley California and resides
virtually at www.warnfarrell.com
as I said we spoke three years ago it
was May 6 2018 just before Dr Farrell's
book The Boy crisis
was published we'll concentrate today on
this book and Associated topics hello
Warren so good to see you it is so good
to see you more than normal Jordan for
all the you know not we've had more than
the boy crisis we've had the Jordan
Peterson crisis obviously uh yeah a very
dull topic that
I don't know I I it's just amazing to me
that during this process um of you going
through what you went through not only
with yourself but with Michaela with
Tammy that you're not only alive but
that you're also that you also produce
an extraordinary book as well in the in
that period of time it's just beyond me
no thank you yeah well it helped keep me
afloat so I've been reviewing the boy
crisis in in quite a bit of detail over
the last few days
um it's it's something I haven't thought
about for a while uh certainly I thought
about it since our last conversation the
world has Twisted and turned in all
sorts of strange ways since then and I
suppose this issue has been pushed this
particular issue the boy crisis let's
say has been pushed to the back burner
in a major way by all sorts of well
cultural movements and by covid and it's
not precisely on the radar you mentioned
to me just when we were discussing this
issue for example begin at the beginning
of our conversation today before we
started Taping that uh President Biden
established a White House gender policy
Council which is supposed to focus on
gender issues but in your opinion pretty
much only focuses on women and girls and
is also supposed to focus on Race but
pretty much ignores black boys which is
perhaps the intersectional place to use
a detestable phrase where the crisis is
the most noticeable so why in the world
should we assume that the topic of your
book the title of your book refers to
something that is real and and if it's
real why aren't we attending to it and
why is it important you know as well
first of all it's real uh because in all
56 of the largest developed Nations boys
are falling behind girls in almost every
single academic subject
um including reading and writing which
are the two biggest predictors of
success or failure as you can probably
imagine
um and so and and boys who do badly in
those subjects are much more likely to
drop out of high school boys in general
are much more likely to drop out of high
school especially in the United States
and boys who drop out of high school are
more than 20 percent likely to be
unemployed in their 20s this is a
statistic before covid when the
unemployment rate in the United States
was 3.4 versus more than 20 for for boys
and so that's just the academic part of
it on the mental health part of it when
boys and girls are at nine they commit
suicide about equally and very minimally
between the edges ages of 10 and 14 boys
commit suicide twice as often as girls
between the ages of 15 and 19 they
commit suicide four times as often as
girls between the ages of 20 and 25 they
commit suicide about five times as often
as girls and most people don't even know
this pay attention to this but this is
only the the tip of the iceberg of the
mental health issue there's you know
where boys are far more likely to die
from drug overdoses opioid overdoses
they're far more likely to be depressed
if you measure depression depression in
a way that includes male symptoms of
depression much much more likely to be
enter into a place places that that take
care of people who are mentally have
mental problems and so on and and when
boys and so I started asking myself you
know what what causes all this you know
and and when I first submitted the boy
crisis to the publisher and sort of in
form a proposal
I outlined 10 causes and those Clauses
included the environment and schools and
so on but I kept coming back to
realizing that the Hub cause of the boy
crisis was was dead deprivation that the
boy crisis resides where dads do not
reside and so that um got me really
thinking about that so for example boys
who are raised by moms and dads together
and go from an intact family to a school
that has very few male teachers there's
not a huge impact a little bit of an
impact that's negative but not much but
if they go from a female only
home environment have only a female role
model that then they go to a school with
almost no male teacher Role Models they
are much more subjected to much more
vulnerable to being seduced by gangs as
a as a pseudo family or China not having
the postponed gratification that dads
tend to bring to the family and so
therefore without that postponed
gratification they're more vulnerable to
a drug dealer saying you can make you
know money really easily by dealing
drugs you don't have to worry about
getting the best grades in school and
you'll you'll prove everybody that you
know you'll drive around in a nice car
you'll be able to get the girls you
can't get because you're you know you're
sort of a loser at school Etc so I just
started looking at all these things I
saw that the sperm count of boys had
dropped 50 percent that the IQs of boys
that dropped 15 and just I started you
know looking and wondering about you
know two things one is how amazing how
how much evidence there was for the boy
crisis and the second was exactly the
question you asked since it's so evident
and we're so focused on girls and
women's issues why are we not even
seeing the the boys and men's issues
that are coming up and how damaging it
is to women
to not have father involvement for
example women that I had dated between
my marriages were constantly talking
about being overwhelmed and so women are
losers by fathers not being involved
fathers feel a lack of purpose
um and they deal with the whole thing
that you talk about in your first rule
of you know not having and not having
some type of change of culture where
there's a Vitality to give them uh to
give them purpose and so we're in a very
uh challenging situation I did come to
understand what the cause of it is but
but it really is depressing to see how
ubiquitous that cause is
so why do you think if the crisis is of
the magnitude that you suggest
um you you you cite some statistics in
the early part of your book
um more men in the UK have died by
suicide in the past year than all
British soldiers in all wars since 1945
suicide now takes more lives than War
murder and natural disasters around the
world combined that might not include
covid I presume that statistic stealing
more than 36 million years of healthy
life and the rate of suicide is growing
much faster for men than for women
um you mentioned that boys IQ has
dropped about 15 points since the 1980s
and make a case in your book that that's
related to fatherlessness we'll get back
into that boys scored lower than girls
in the 63 largest developed nations in
which the Pisa a set of international
standard tests was given boys are 50
percent more likely than girls to fail
to meet basic Proficiency in any of the
Three core subjects of reading math and
science by eighth grade in the U.S 40
percent of girls are at least proficient
in writing compared to one in five boys
one in five
boys who perform as well as girls are
graded less favorably you know we did
some research years ago showing that
agreeable children get better grades
than their IQ would predict and girls
are more agreeable than boys and so what
that means is if you're less agreeable
and more likely to be troubled then
because that is associated with being
less agreeable then you're graded more
harshly than your pure cognitive ability
would predict and that probably accounts
for the gender difference or at least
for part of it not that it particularly
matters but
um
boys have gone from 61 percent of
University degrees to 39 percent girls
the reverse percent of boys who say they
don't like school has gone up 70 since
1980. I imagine it was already pretty
high in 1980. boys are expelled from
school three times as often in girls as
girls that's the same statistic
basically as boys are more likely to be
arrested for conduct disorder juvenile
delinquency men are much more likely to
be imprisoned
um it's the same pattern there one in
three children in the UK and the U.S
grow up without a father
um and you know our culture pushes the
idea constantly that all families are of
equal virtue let's say and I suppose
that's justified in that
it's
self-evident that
of all the things that people strive to
do well in their lives they strive to
raise their children I would say more
diligently than than they might meet any
other requirement or responsibility and
so it seems cruel to judge the quality
of the family given the commitment that
it takes for example to be a single
parent but I I'm releasing a podcast
this week with Richard Trombley who's
perhaps the world's foremost authority
on the development of aggression in
children development and Regulation and
he his data certainly indicates that
having a single mother especially a
single mother with issues
um is uh
uh a predictor of the maintenance of
aggressive behavior throughout the
lifespan a major predictor now he
Associates that more with uh trouble
on the maternal side uh young mothers
young uneducated mothers young
uneducated mothers with psychiatric and
other health difficulties who lack
social support hasn't concentrated so
much on the fatherlessness end of it but
the upshot is or the takeaway is the
same these are these are families that
are not producing children who have the
same probability of thriving let's say
um you said also Japan has increased its
vocational education programs so that 23
percent of its high school graduates
graduate study at vocational schools and
they have a 99.6 percent employment rate
that's something we can talk about as
well so your your book is peppered with
well
huh
painful statistics I would say
um why do you think we don't attend to
this Warren
I think historically and biologically
um men were programmed um and and really
through animals including insects right
on through to human beings we were
programmed to be able to be willing to
die in order to get women's love and so
in every generation had its war and in
each generation's War we said some
version of Uncle Sam needs you and we
pointed to the uncle who in the Marine
uniform on the on the count on the on
the mantle and we were so proud of him
he died in World War one or two and the
boy sees that the boy he can get love
and approval and respect even though
he's being criticized by this person or
that person or in school or at home
um is he can he can he can be a soldier
and so we give we Inspire boys to be
disposable and we and we and and when
and when somebody is likely to be lost
you don't develop as much emotional
attachment to that person and if you if
you're if your way of surviving is for
males to be willing to lose their life
so we're not under Nazi rule
Etc you begin to develop a connection
between caring about men largely to the
degree that they are willing to protect
women and die for women and so you don't
care about the people who are dying so
much if you have a an incentive in there
to uh if you have an incentive to have
them be willing to die in order to
protect you and so so it's a Disposable
Male hypothesis that would be the
hypothesis on The evolutionary
psychology front I mean one of the
things I've noticed is that my my
critics let's say like to parody my
audience as well angry white and young
and male let's say
um but the thing that's interesting
about that is that
perhaps you could give me the benefit of
the doubt and say that if that is my
audience and my audience is certainly
much broader than that and that wasn't
who I was targeting let's say but even
if it was well is there something wrong
with talking to those people who are
alienated and angry and perhaps for some
genuine reason the answer seems to be
the default answer seems to be they're
so contemptible that anyone who even
tries to help them is to be regarded
with extreme suspicion and it seems to
me that that's in some manner a
reflection of the phenomenon that you're
discussing which is a very uh
what would you say if it's it's very
deeply rooted and fundamental
um at least from one perspective so you
know I was thinking today maybe our
culture is set up so that the most
esteemed people are highly successful
men but the least esteemed people are
unsuccessful men
and so maybe maybe that maybe that's the
strange Paradox is that
man so in some sense have it the best if
they're occupying the Pinnacle of
achievement but they have it the worst
if they're at the bottom of the Heap and
that seems right if you look at women's
dating preferences for example compared
to men women disproportionately are
disproportionately attracted to
successful men and disproportionately
likely even to rank men of average
attainment as below average uh whether
it's attractiveness or or any of the
other uh criteria by which such things
might be judged
so you know the question is if it is so
deeply rooted
well one question is if it's so deeply
rooted
what makes you think there's anything
that we can do about it I mean you
haven't had any luck for example
convincing the White House over years to
to pay some attention to
boys essentially even though they're the
problem let's say you might think that
even from the perspective of prevention
there would be some some
attention paid in that direction but
this bias is so pervasive that it seems
to even interfere with that
absolutely so a few things lots of
really good things you brought up so let
me deal with the first thing on the
anger issue
um one of um I don't know um if we
discussed this before uh Jordan but I've
been teaching couples communication
workshops for 30 years and um just
produced a 30 a zoom course on that a
few a few days ago and one of the things
that is fundamental to that course is um
is that men and women and this is gay
couples as well and trans couples and
um and even parents and children all
complain about their Partners or their
parents or their child's anger and
almost and one of the things that I work
with them on is to understand that anger
is vulnerabilities mask
and the moment you see your partner as
angry look for the vulnerability that
created that anger that felt the fact
that they felt rejected of the
possibility that they felt rejected the
possibility that they felt misunderstood
the possibility that they said what they
feel their bother that bothers them over
and over again but it's been ignored and
every time that they say that uh say
what bothers them there's a response to
it the disconnect that cuts Cuts them
off and interrupts them before they
finish their full feeling they're not
drawn out and the response that they get
is an argument and so they tend to not
bring up issues that really concern them
because it's only going to be met by an
argument that will escalate the problem
and so they end up walking on eggshells
now who does that men women both sexes
do that and it doesn't make any
difference whether it's straight or gay
couples they both do this is a complaint
that I hear from literally everybody
um and so when when your audience is is
criticized as being angry I would just
ask you know if you if you look at that
anger and as the vulnerability how is
that audience not being heard and the
way you are serving that audience is to
hear so if to the degree that that
audience is part part of your audience
is is is is serving that Audience by
healing them by having them have a place
where they feel heard as opposed to
dismissed when someone feels dismissed
they become depressed they become they
turn inward
um and an example of that is when men
and fathers and mothers go through the
family court system uh fathers are much
less likely to feel heard in the family
courts that feel treated as equals oh
that's another reason why I wanted to
talk to you before and today in my
clinical practice I had men
who are fine upstanding men who were
absolutely ground into
Nothing by the family court system I
mean I pulled out all the tricks I had
out of my hat one client in particular
a medical professional who whose life
was completely destroyed by the family
law system it was like watching a train
wreck in slow motion to use a terrible
cliche
we tried every trick in the book to keep
him afloat what he wanted was 50 access
to his three kids and he was a really
good father I went out with him a number
of times with his kids and watched how
he interacted with them and how he
taught them and and how he cared for
them and went to his house and looked at
how he set up their bedroom and he did
this guy did everything right he was
extremely high in conscientiousness so
unsurprising but um
you know he had his driver's license
taken away he had his passport taken
away he had his livelihood demolished by
ill-founded Rumors by a spouse that was
hell-bent on his destruction I mean we
even went so far as to have him pick up
his kids when when they made the switch
in front of a really really busy
Supermarket she would pull up behind him
right in front of the doors of the
supermarket the kids would come out she
would stay in the car
the kids would come out and go into his
truck and pull away so that everything
that transpired between the two of them
was in full public view all the time and
despite that she managed to get into his
car a number of times but anyways he he
he he was just demolished and I've seen
this and and you know I get criticized
maybe maybe we can go into this a little
bit
I get criticized for a couple of things
by men
um regularly
one is I get criticized because I stand
up for traditional marriage and there's
always a proportion of men who write and
I they're usually men who've been
demolished by the family court system
who say look you should stop telling
young men to adopt a permanent
relationship get married because the
family court system is so
um prejudiced against man that
to sign a marriage contract if you sign
it with the wrong person is you know
tantamount to a
well let's not call it a death warrant
but but it's a very bad idea you know
and my my response to that is well
you're basically married if you lived
together for six months anyways and so I
don't see how the marriage actually adds
to that you know in terms of in terms of
risk
um
but there it's not like I don't
understand that there's a point there
and it's so it's interesting because I
do believe that the family court system
I've looked at it I've been involved in
it several times uh wasn't to my benefit
I would say
[Music]
um
the men have the men who are objecting
have a point and then I'm also
suggesting to young men another point of
criticism that you know they adopt
traditional responsibilities to the
degree that that's possible and that
that's where they'll find meaning but
you know some of your work makes me
second guess that at least to some
degree wondering if
I just don't see an alternative I
suppose that's really the issue is that
well what do we have we have our jobs we
have our careers we have our loved ones
we have our families that's life and if
you don't have that well then you're
adrift that's the purpose void that you
talk about in this in this book
um but if the traditional
Pathways to meaning let's say are no
longer reliable what's a guy to do let's
say we really we really so
to affirm what you're saying and put a
piece of data to that when people are
going through the family court system
mothers and fathers are going through
the family court system uh the father is
eight times as likely as the mother to
commit suicide
from the frustration obviously of not
feeling able to connect to his his
children what what very few mothers and
fathers understand is that you know dads
have adopted in their traditional role
sort of a father's Catch-22 they learn
to earn money they learn to love their
family by being away from the love of
their family they often do things like
they may drive cabs they may they may
quit their passion of being an
elementary school teacher becoming a
superintendent or a principal of schools
and they hate Administration but they
end up earning more money because they
want their children to do better than
they had a chance to do in their life
they want the children to go to a good
school which means a good school
district which means a more expensive
home which means that if they were a
musician or an actor or a writer or that
elementary school teacher they have to
give up that for the most part because
they'll earn more doing something that
they like less and so we've right which
is something which is part of the pay a
gap that's never really emphasized is
that one of the ways you earn more and
you outline that and I think a great
book why men earn more I think that is a
great book
um
you know you point out that you earn
more for doing jobs that are less
desirable intrinsically desirable in
some sense I mean that's part of the
equation at least their jobs are more
dangerous they take you away from home
more often Etc and those are
disproportionately male jobs I mean the
guy that I saw who got demolished so
badly you know his wife claimed to be
the primary caregiver and the courts are
tilted so that they favor the mother
especially in the first three years of a
child's life and I've had some sympathy
for that perspective
for a variety of reasons although I
think I've I think I've rethought my
stats and believe that 50 50 custody
default is the appropriate default
um uh just like 50 50 default with
regards to money or during the uh life
of the marriage is the default
um but my my client worked a lot uh to
provide for his family and so and his
wife stayed at home and was with the
kids all the time as a consequence and
because of that when they went to court
she had the upper hand in the
um in the in the custody negotiation
because the judge believed perhaps that
it was in the best interest of the
children that they continue with their
primary caregiver and that's a very hard
argument to to
push aside given the strength of the
mother child Bond especially in the
first
especially in the first year I mean
maybe maybe the first year is
exceptional
perhaps it's not perhaps we have to move
to 50 50 regardless but what do you
think about that
there's four one of the things that I
talk about in the boy crisis is the four
must Do's of after divorce and this is
like I'm now putting huge amounts of
research together into sort of four
simple things but one the number one and
most important is that the children have
an equal amount by the way this is if
you want the children to do almost as
well as they would in an intact family
not as well but almost as well okay so
this is a child's Center see that's
something we should establish here too
as a principal
in my sense is always marriage is for
children not for adults exactly they're
the primary they're the primary target
of of uh of rank ordered importance
children first and then the adults
marriages for children not for adults
that's that's a very immature way of
looking at the world if you think your
marriage is for you you're you have a
free choice when you have children to
have the children and not have the
children that's like having a free
choice to take the job or not take the
job but once you take the job you take
the responsibilities with it and and so
so in court what I talk about I do a lot
of expert witness work on this issue and
in court what I explain is that we net
we now for the first time in the last
five or six years we now have really
incontrovertible evidence that four
things are really needed if we want the
children to do the best to divorce
number one is an equal amount of time
with mother and father the closer you
get to 50 50 even when the child is like
one year old or just born it is that is
um that leads to the greatest
possibility of a positive outcome on so
many measures that we'd have to spend
almost a half hour talking about those
well I'd like I would like to talk about
that to some degree because it's it's
somewhat counterintuitive so I think
it's important to delve into that
absolutely and I'll be happy to do that
okay
um and then number two is that the
father and mother live within about 20
minutes drive time from each other
because when they don't oftentimes and
become very resentful of the other
parent because they have to go to the
other parent's home and miss miss their
soccer practice so therefore they don't
get the skills and the teamwork and the
continuity to be good on the soccer team
or miss their best friend's birthday
party or whatever
um and so there's a tension when the
father and mother live after divorce
more than about 20 minutes of drive time
from each other number third number
three is that the children cannot
experience any bad mouthing or negative
body language from Mom toward Dad Dad
toward Mom because when the child looks
in the mirror and let's say the child's
a boy and um hears that your father is
irresponsible and your father's a liar
and your father is this and that that
boy is looking in the mirror and saying
well maybe I'm a narcissist like my dad
well the boys are young boys play dad
and so whatever they think of his dad is
going to be is be going to enter their
space of fantasy and I mean what they
play out in their fantasy play is their
Destiny yes and so that image of of
future masculinity I mean I always think
of Captain Hook when I think of that
because Peter Pan stays Peter Pan
because he doesn't want to be Captain
Hook and it's a brilliant it's brilliant
mythologically that story because it's
got it exactly right if you
conceptualize the great father is power
hungry Tyrant which is increasingly the
way we conceptualize our entire society
and we call it patriarchal
then why would you want to grow up to be
that why why do you want to be that
adult and so if the mother is modeling
her opinion that that's what constitutes
dad that she's also modeling her opinion
that that's what constitutes future
mature son since he's going to be Dad
yes exactly and then that boy hearing
that both let's say if he hears that
from the mother by the way this is true
father to Mother also I mean bad
mouthing in the part of the father of
the mother is really damaging to the
child because not only does the child is
that child half the genes of the other
parent but also the child can't bring it
up to either parent because if it brings
it up to the parent that made that
complaint
um and it it loses that the favoritism
of that parent if it brings it up to the
other parent that your dad said this or
mom said this about you that
destabilizes the child's future even
more so the child has a terrible secret
all the time at betrayal the child's in
the state of betrayal all the time
matter what exactly and I've seen
children used as Weapons continually in
exactly that manner it's it's it's
appalling it's it's appalling beyond
comprehension
and then the fourth thing that's very
important is that the children the
parents rather are in couples
communication counseling or relationship
counseling not just when there is an
emergency when there's an emergency
there's everything has to be made as a
quick decision and there's a tendency to
see the other parents worst intent
whereas long-term counseling allows the
father and the mother to see to have
time to hear the mother or Father's best
intent about what they're doing and why
they're doing it well so at the bare
minimum that means that the couple gets
together in an administrative sense to
sort out the necessary details in the
presence of a relatively uh what would
you say interest-free commitment free
bias free third-party exactly it's
really a management Ploy rather in some
sense rather than a counseling Ploy per
se or at least you could parse it out in
those two ways obviously once you have
children with someone you're married to
them permanently in some real sense and
so that has to be taken care of and a
lot of taking care of a marriage I do
make this point to some degree in in
Beyond order when I talk about making
space for romance a fair bit of marriage
is Administrative detail and getting
that down getting that right I mean that
all that does allow you to see some Good
Will on the part of your partner as well
yes absolutely and you you brought up a
moment ago to go to the the different
development developmental advantages
that happen when father and mother are
both involved and those developmental
advantages include the father
involvement so after marriage or after
divorce father involvement lack of
Father involvement is the single biggest
predictor of suicide it is one of the
biggest predictors of a child not
graduating from high school dropping out
of school it's a very big predictor of a
child being having
being aggressive but not assertive and
last time when we did our last interview
together we talked about the whole uh
roughhousing dimension of things and I'm
not going to go through that again
because of the fact that people can go
to that other interview and see that but
there are about nine differences between
dad style parenting and Mom style
parenting and a lot of those differences
moms are so good at say spotting a Sons
and Daughters
um you know gifts like say sweetie you
sing so nicely or you're going to be a
great actress or a musician or whatever
you should try and do that and dads are
likely to affirm that but not so
um not so vociferously at first but are
more likely to say some some version of
a well you know if you want to be a gym
you know if you want to be in the
Olympics you've got to practice all the
time and we'll yes we'll give you the um
some tutoring or we'll go out of our way
to take you to gymnastics practice but
if you're not really focused on if
you're focused son responding to tweets
and and going to parties and doing other
things you're never going to become an
Olympic gymnast so you have to make a
trade-off and the dad is the dad is much
more likely to
um the whole uh enforce the boundaries
around that trade-off and require the
child to to focus and discipline
um on a focus and and have postponed
gratification around what they say they
want to do and give up support for the
child that the child doesn't follow
through with that it only has a dream
that they're not willing to have the
discipline okay so that's okay so
there's a real hypothesis there which I
think is worth delving into because one
question obviously is well why is it not
good to be without a father and is it
not the case that someone else maybe two
females for example could
play the paternal role and obviously
that's true to some degree if we could
specify what the paternal role is but
you make a very specific case which is
quite an interesting one which is that
its fathers primarily who are
responsible for the instantiation of
delay of gratification now we should
point out that among psychologists who
are leery of IQ as the best predictor of
success in the long run the vast
majority of those psychologists whose
opinion I do not agree with by the way
is that the thing that predicts better
than IQ is the capacity to delay
gratification and that seems to be
associated with trait conscientiousness
and trait conscientiousness which is
dutifulness and industriousness and
orderliness the ability to make and
maintain verbal contracts
conscientiousness is the best predictor
of long-term success outside of General
cognitive ability I would also say that
in cultures where families are are more
likely to be intact and so we could say
Southeast Asian cultures for example
and point out that children from
Southeast Asian cultures do
disproportionately better in North
America than children of North American
parents the reason for that seems
twofold one is more correlational
perhaps in that those families are much
more likely to be intact and so to have
fathers but the second is is that the
advantage that is accrued to those
children seems to be in the domain of
conscientious striving it's work ethic
it's the ability to delay gratification
and so if it is the case that farther
involvement is a key predictor of the
capacity to delay gratification
then that's an absolutely crucial issue
and and we need to know well is that
true and we also need to know if it's
true why it's true and perhaps it has
something to do with the relative
disagreeability of of fathers so women
are more
prone to negative emotion than men and
they're more empathic and and and
compassionate and polite than men men
are more disagreeable and use
disagreeableness is the best predictor
by the way of criminal behavior from the
personality perspective even though it's
not a very good predictor but if you're
really really disagreeable that's one of
the things that can end that can land
you in jail because you don't take other
people into account you can be callous
and cruel and unkind but just because
something has its pathologies in the
extreme doesn't mean it's not necessary
in moderation and disagreeable people
are better at saying no and it's setting
boundaries and at being cruel to be kind
let's say well sure you're good at that
you want to do that but here's what it's
going to take and I'm going to draw
boundaries and I'm going to draw lines
and you think that's fathers and what
evidence do you have for that oh my
goodness oh just for example one of the
things I'll talk about is the
um the difference between boundary
setting and Boundary enforcement and you
know dads and moms will both set
boundaries very similarly they'll both
say you can't have your ice cream until
you finish your peas and children will
test boundaries pretty much exactly the
same way though and there's two pieces
possible before they get there
absolutely and they balance on that edge
and push because they want to find out
exactly where that border is my son
who's relatively disagreeable man he
pushed boundaries at every opportunity
when he was between two and four it was
really something to behold he was a
force of nature in going right up to the
line and pushing on it just to see what
was going to happen you know and and so
go ahead yeah and then but the
difference between moms and dads is not
these boundary setting or the children's
challenge but rather the um the boundary
enforcement the child will be able to
say to Mom some version of like uh you
know I had a tough time in school today
I really don't because I was teased one
of this boy and and he's the best most
popular boy or the most popular girl in
the school usually would be the boy that
would tease him and you know and so Mom
is saying to herself you know well what
am I going to do here
um am I going to be get into a big
argument over a few P's when he's
depressed that would be insensitive and
stupid uh so I'll tell you what sweetie
you know you can have this many more
peas and then you can have your ice
cream and then the boy will see ah
negotiating is or a girl will see is he
negotiating as a possibility here so
from a position of weakness yes exactly
I I will have half that many peas that
Mom you know put a set aside and then
Mom is going again you know all right
now he at least tried I'll give him the
benefit of the doubt
um okay you can have the ice cream now
whereas dad is much more likely to go
um I'm sorry we have a deal here sweetie
I know you had a bad day in school
um but you uh but you need to finish the
piece the deal is before you get your
ice cream Oh Daddy you're so mean mommy
doesn't do that to me and she but me and
yeah yeah and and dad goes well you know
you can you can can continue to complain
but this is my rules now and if you
continue to complain there'll be no more
ice cream there'll be no ice cream even
it's a possibility tomorrow night now
we're forcing the child is getting
forced to have to pay attention to doing
what she or he needs to do finish the
peas before she or he gets the ice cream
what they want to have okay so let me
take what you said apart a little bit
from a personality perspective okay so
I'm gonna hit it from three perspectives
so the first is I've always been
entranced by the Disney movie Pinocchio
and Pinocchio is about the development
of an autonomous individual right
someone who's free from having his
strings pulled by others and who isn't a
wooden head but someone who's alive and
can think for himself and as Pinocchio
develops he faces is a number of
Temptations and one is to become an
actor which means to become a deceiver
or a player of Parts rather than the
real thing but another is to become a
neurotic wreck who wants Vacations so
he's tempted by Pleasure Island and the
way the fox and the cat tempt him is by
convincing him that he's ill convincing
him to capitalize on that and convincing
him that the respite for his illness is
a vacation from his a permanent vacation
from his responsibility so his The
Temptations are deceitful actor and
neurotic victim so it's a very
perspicacious film it's a remarkable
film but in any case now let's take that
apart a little bit so
I'll first make an observation for my
own marriage my wife is no pushover and
she's relatively low in agreeableness by
female standards but what I observed in
our relationship was that
it was hard for her to discipline the
children especially when they were very
young and I think the reason for that
was partly temperament
because I think the feminine temperament
tilts towards compassion and nurturance
whereas the masculine temperament tilts
more towards
um
uh
self-love yeah yeah fine that's good
thank you for for filling in there yeah
yeah it's conditional it's if there's a
conditional element to it right the
judgmental element which is what you'll
love by the way but conditional approval
as part of total love
right good good clarification absolutely
right because the container is love yes
but but that can mean delay of
gratification right and there's a
cruelty and delay of gratification even
when you impose it on yourself it's a
it's a cruelly in the local sense
because it causes distress I mean right
now my son and daughter are teaching
their son who's only slightly over one
no and I told them to how to do it so
for example he sits at our table
out in the backyard and he reaches
behind and he's tearing the plants out
of the green wall that's behind him and
so that's a no and I said
I encourage them I said look take his
hand hold it firmly so that he can't
move it say no hold him until he stops
struggling to to undertake his
goal-directed activity he'll probably
cry as soon as he stops resisting let go
and give him a pat say you do that 20
times then when you say no he'll cry and
stop and then 20 times after that he'll
just stop he won't cry so 40 times and
you've taught him no which is an amazing
thing because then you can let him go
free because whenever you say no he'll
just stop and so you can facilitate his
freedom instead of having to be
helicopter Tyrant parent who I've seen
many of who is one step behind their
ambulatory two and a half year old you
know interfering with absolutely
everything he does because he can't
grasp a basic principle of socialization
in any case
no has some pain associated with it
because otherwise it wouldn't produce
tears and no is a very very hard thing
to learn and knows what the world
teaches not just what people teach in
any case
back to my wife
she spent the first year bonding with
the child and also learning how to
respond essentially especially in the
first six months to his or her every
whim because a crying infant demands
instant recourse and the crying infant
is always right especially if they're
under six months of age but then when
the kid becomes ambulatory and starts to
require discipline the woman is required
to switch from this primarily empathic
role which is facilitated by hormonal
transformation post pregnancy by the way
from this primarily nurturing role
do a role that is in some ways in the
local environment it's antithesis it's
very hard for women to do that and so my
observation has been that they they need
they require someone else to bolster
that element because it runs at counter
purposes to what they're required to do
in early infancy and so okay so but so
delay of gratification we're going to
focus on that and an example
illustrating what you're saying and this
is hard database example that I talk
about in the boy crisis is the
um is is bedtime so we know when we look
at bedtime set by mothers and fathers is
that moms will set bedtimes earlier than
dad's will
um dads will sit bedtimes later but the
children end up when studied going to
bed earlier when they're with the dad
than they do with the mom and so why is
that when the dad will be more likely to
do is say something version of like okay
bedtime is nine o'clock and um if you
and whatever when you get all your
chores done when you get yourself your
bro you brush your teeth you change your
clothes you've done your homework Etc
um and I see your homework and it's done
well uh that any time that you have
between when you're finished when when
your sister and brother are both
finished uh your homework Etc that time
you have to play or do or or ask me to
do whatever I want read your favorite
story Etc uh with Mom she's more likely
to and so the kids end up rushing to get
through
the everything that they need to do that
is postponed gratification in order to
get what they want to have their this
story read to them some roughhousing
before bedtime
um and you know something along those
lines um and then with the understanding
that they will then uh everything will
be cut off at um at nine o'clock the
children with Mom are more likely to
um mom is
says you know bedtime is this time it's
9 30 let's say and the children
that gets to be done 30 and one of the
boys or kids will say you know well I
haven't done my homework you know
knowing that Mom will want the child to
have done his or her homework
um with um rather than go to bed without
having homework be done and so that uh
so Mom will say well all right you
should have done your homework before
but uh we'll allow you a little bit more
time for us to finish your homework off
and so the boy is able to orbit girl is
able to manipulate better more time than
than that 9 30 time
um and stay open even or say up up even
later uh what what the dad makes clear
to the child is that if um if if he or
she does not if they use up all that
time and they haven't done up that doing
the homework and it's now nine o'clock
your bedtime uh sorry but you are you
you will not you just go to school and
not have your homework done that's your
responsibility to get that done by this
point in time and so the um and so
that's one of the sort of dynamics that
happens that lead to children being more
likely to be focused on doing what they
need to do and um and also children
brought up by mothers are more likely to
be ADHD if they're brought up
predominantly by mothers 30 of children
or ADHD that includes the average
between boys and girls boys are
obviously more likely to be ADHD whereas
with fathers brought up predominantly by
fathers only 15 percent are likely to
have ADHD because you can see from those
examples that the the boy or the girl
the children are required to focus on
doing what they need to do get that
homework done get their teeth brushed
before they get what they want to have
and the same we talked last time about
roughhousing how the child the children
were were prevented from having more
roughhousing fun if they push their
sister or their brother out of the way
and they didn't consider their the
needs of their brother and sister
so back back to the the personality
differences so women are higher in
negative emotion and they're higher in
trait agreeableness and so
the way to manipulate someone who's
higher negative emotion is to manifest
negative emotion and to say
um here's a bunch of reasons why I'm not
doing so well and so I deserve a break
and that that so because of the
sensitivity to negative emotion the fact
of the negative emotion is more
compelling because it's more deeply felt
and then the agreeableness means that
there's a much higher probability of
being felt sorry for and and you can see
that in the positive light when you're
dealing with infants because when
they're in distress the proper response
is immediate gratification of their
desires but that's not a good long-term
strategy which is I think likely why
well I don't exactly understand the
relationship with lower agreeableness
it's certainly the reason for the
emergence of conscientiousness which is
a cold virtue and which involves delay
of gratification now men are not more
conscientious than women they're more
industrious and industrious to some
slight degree and less orderly and those
two combined make conscientiousness but
the agreeableness difference is
definitely you know it's it's quite
pronounced and so you know partly what
you're arguing for from the perspective
of a personality psychologist is the
necessity for two parent families really
on temperamental grounds on and really
on biological grounds I mean these
things are mutable to some degree but
not easily no and and the other thing
that's quite interesting is that and
this is something everyone should really
listen to is that
they're anti-mutable given the way that
our society is proceeding so you might
say well there are these personality
differences between men and women
higher neuroticism in women so that's
proclivity to negative emotion and
higher agreeableness
but if we made our societies equal
those personality differences would go
away and then we wouldn't require
bigendered
um parenting but
what's happened is that if you go to the
Scandinavian countries where the if
attempts to equalize the social
landscape have gone the furthest and in
some sense had the most success
um there are notable exceptions so if
you rank order countries by the
egalitarian nature of their social
policies
now and that doesn't require that any of
them have perfectly egalitarian policies
it just requires that you admit that
some cultures are more egalitarian than
others in their attempts and their
practices and I think only a fool
wouldn't put the Scandinavian countries
at the top of that list
then you'd say well what that should
mean is that in Scandinavia the
personality differences between men and
women are minimized and in authoritarian
countries they're maximized and exactly
the reverse is what happens is if you
iron out the wrinkles in the social
landscape so that it's more egalitarian
men and women get more different with
regards to their interests people versus
things so women get more interested in
people and less interested in things and
less interested in the stem fields at
least in partial consequence science
technology engineering and Mathematics
and they get even more different than
men in terms of their neuroticism and
their agreeableness not less
and so that argues against easy social
amelioration of this necessity for
bigender two-parent households yes yes
the the children that seem to do the
best are ones that have they're in
intact families or as I mentioned before
uh the children have about an equal
amount of time with both parents and
that there is a checks and balance
parenting so a child will come to the
mother and say can I climb the tree in
the backyard and Mom will say well maybe
in a few years sweetie but not right now
um you're too young at it you could
really hurt yourself and that child will
ask the same thing of a dad and the dad
will be more likely to say well yes I
guess so but be careful and then if the
mother finds out the child the father
and the mother will go well wait a
minute you know you're not blah blah
blah you're playing one against the
other here kid good work but no yes but
well the kid will play one against the
other but but one of the best responses
to that is for the child to be able to
see the mother and father negotiating
right right absolutely and saying you
know well yes you can climb the tree but
you can't go this Beyond this branch
this high and you can't you know go on
these branches and Dad you uh you need
to be out there under the tree so in
case the child Falls uh the other child
will will um be cushioned by your fall
and and don't get preoccupied with the
cell phone in fact maybe give me the
cell phone while you're out there with a
with ginger or Mary under the tree and
right so they see the negotiation
between masculine and feminine taking
place why do you think that's so
important and you say there's research
supporting that specific proposition
it's a very specific proposition so
what's the research and well it's most
specific and metaphorical specifically
we now know that children climbing trees
makes them worry about what risks are
worth taking what risks are and that
fires synapses that are outside of their
normal synapse firing development and
their op and the data that we have for
that is that the is it the IQs of
children doing risk-taking behaviors
like climbing trees in increase as they
do that risk taking behavior and they
increase their cycle motor functioning
we see okay so there's this prop there's
this concept uh that uh Russian
developmental psychologists came up with
the godsky called the zone of proximal
development and one of the things he
noted was that um I believe it was
vygotsky who discovered this it might
not have been but it's the same
phenomenon so it doesn't really matter
so if you analyze the way that parents
talk to children who are developing
their language so infants who are still
learning to speak
the adults don't speak to the infant in
terms that the infant can understand
precisely the adults speak to the infant
slightly up ahead of its developmental
trajectory and vygotsky called that the
zone of proximal development which is
the key Zone to be in if you're going to
learn so imagine and I make much of this
in my books that there's a domain that
you've already mastered and so that when
you operate in that domain the things
you want to happen happen that's the
domain of order and then there's another
domain where all hell breaks loose and
you don't know what to do and that's the
domain of chaos but there's an
intermediary where you're expanding your
zone of competence through exploration
and that's really where Consciousness
operates and that's that's where we
learn and so risk-taking behavior isn't
exactly risk-taking Behavior it's it's
embeddedness in the zone of proximal
development I'll give you an example so
it's germane to your example so when my
kids were little I bought this old
wrecked wooden playset monkey bars and
and swings it was dilapidated but I took
it home and
sanded it down and repainted it and you
know gave it about five or six more
years of life and uh my daughter who was
about two and a half at the time would
go out there on that monkey bar and so
it was a ladder going up about six feet
which is a pretty decent ladder for for
a little two and a half year old you
know and so we were inclined to watch
her and she would stand on the first
rung and then move her foot a quarter of
the way up towards it and then half a
way up towards it and then three
quarters of the way up towards it and
then she'd put her foot on the rung and
then she'd do the same with her next
foot staying in that zone of proximal
development can I move a quarter of Step
can I move half a step can I move three
quarters of a step and we'd watch her do
that and doing that she pinned all those
movements together and mastered climbing
up the Monkey Bar and it was much to our
satisfaction to watch her because she
was taking she wasn't taking a risk
exactly she was pushing herself out into
the zone of proximal development and and
engaging in this Mastery Behavior it's
so you could say in some sense and I
believe this to be the case that the
masculine Spirit encourages and
facilitates the transformation so if the
if the feminine is
is concentrating on who the child is now
and what that child now needs the
masculine is concentrating on how that
child can move to the next developmental
stage and pushing that along is that is
that a reasonable presumption a yes and
B here's an example of that also that
coordinates or connects perfectly with
that the data shows that dads are more
likely for example to use words that the
child does not yet understand or does
not understand at that time and um and
the mom is oftentimes looking at saying
well you know why are you saying that
you know the child doesn't understand
what you mean and the dad's conscious or
unconscious sort of feeling is I want to
plant seeds and after the child hears
this in different contexts
um she or he will begin to sort of
understand what that word is and what
that means and moms feel it's just moms
are more likely to feel that's just so
insensitive
being in this zone of proximal
development like if I brought that into
the conversation because you talked
about risk taking and so what you could
say is that as you push the boundaries
of the zone of proximal development you
enter the domain of risk and so then the
question would be what
personality elements are capable of
tolerating the transformation of the
zone of proximal development into the
zone of risk and the answer to that
would be lower neuroticism and lower
agreeableness because lower neuroticism
would mean you wouldn't worry as much
so the magnitude of the perceived risk
would be less and lower agreeableness
would mean well even if there is some
risk you don't care as much it's like
it's okay now it's not like you don't
care about the risk exactly although
it's so it is that in some felt sense
but the reason for that is that well
there's another judgment which is well
the risk is worth taking because there's
more than one risk at play here there's
the proximal risk that you engage in
when you push yourself but there's the
distal risk that you engage in when you
don't push yourself
yes you're right on target there now and
this is why so many of the differences
between male and female style parenting
is so important to understand and one of
those that sort of connects to what
you're saying is that the difference is
that moms and dads tend to to get into
about dads teasing children
um and which feels to many moms like it
often results in the child crying when
the teasing first starts but it begins
to teach the child a whole series of
skill sets you know what's what tones of
voice are teasing or playfulness and
it's like roughhousing it has poisoning
is an abstraction of rough housing
exactly precisely
um you know what I what eye contact is
being playful what I contacted serious
uh what what body language what I'm
exaggerating now
um you get off the bed because if you
don't get off the bed daddy will always
be make it make life hard for you you
know how bad daddy is
um and you know the child starts
laughing maybe after a while maybe one
time that this going like that the child
goes oh my goodness is scared and so
then after a while the child learns that
oh that's daddy having fun that's us
having fun and they begin to distinguish
between
um make sure you get off the bed as fun
versus make sure you get off the bed as
you know something that is right well
they also learn to distinguish between
what's mean and what's funny you know I
mean when I was watching my children
especially with regards to their sibling
rivalry which is likely to emerge in
children who are less than three years
apart in their birth order and and sort
of in proportion to the closeness of
their of their birth
um
so if you want to minimize childhood
sibling rivalry space the children out
three years we don't know what that does
to the relationship across time but we
know it minimizes sibling rivalry in any
case I wanted them always to stay on the
funny side of teasing because teasing
can easily turn into torture and so they
had to learn these extremely fine
gradations of humor and and and to do
that they had to play on the edge and
the question is how necessary is it to
have the capacity to allow your children
to play on the edge and fathers have
that my temperament more than mothers do
now but you you know you pointed out
something really interesting you didn't
exactly make the claim that the father
was necessary you made a more subtle
claim which was that the dialogue
between the father's higher risk
tolerance and the mother's lower risk
tolerance is necessary and that takes
place that can take place within an
intact marriage but you also said it can
take place in an in a marriage that's
been broken apart as long as the couples
commit to a long-term communication
strategy that a super long-term
supervised communication strategy yes so
it's the dialogue maybe that's really
the issue here it's the interplay
between masculine feminine
is that the key thing rather than the
presence of both is because you can
imagine a man and a woman in a household
who don't communicate ever about
anything and I can't imagine that that's
going to be an optimal environment for a
child despite the fact that both parents
are nominally there yes yes absolutely
the the children do well when both
parents are involved about equally and
that's because of a lot of subtle things
here one for example is hangout time and
particularly boys if you ask them like
how is soccer today uh the boy will say
okay and um but with hangout time and no
not much more well what else happened
what happened at soccer today nothing
much
um you know and then but if the father
has hangout time let's say in a divorce
situation with the child uh the child is
likely maybe their ones doing homework
the other was doing their a different
type of work and they end up in the
kitchen together and then looking
through the thing and then the boy will
say yeah dad you know Daddy I I don't
get it if you're you're playing soccer
and you're doing really well and I was
goalie last week and this week I wasn't
goalie but I thought I did really well
in the and the coach even said I did
really well but now he put He put in
Jimmy for goalie goalie instead of me
um what's that about
um and that's when children with
Hangouts uh with hangout time both boys
and girls tend to to do much better than
they do when they just are asked a quick
question for a conversation for a
daughter is hanging they need time for
the questions to Bubble Up
of their own accord exactly or some
little thing reminds them of something
you know if you ask a child how are you
doing oftentimes they'll say fine but if
you said you know if you ask them
something specific how did you like
having the ice cream taken away from you
by by somebody at school then they'll
have a response to that so when
something triggers something that is
very specific the child will tend to
sort of open up and um on his or her own
terms and interestingly I said hangout
time was very important for boys
psychologically some researchers at the
University of California Irvine said
it's a single greatest predictor of
psychological security and girls hangout
time with that and hang out times with
moms and dads has a different dimension
to it the children know that if they if
they say say a problem to Mom she's more
likely to be reassuring I'm sure that
you know I'm sure that really what it
wanted you to do really well he was
probably just giving the other the other
the other um a person a chance because
in order for them to feel good about
themselves like you did when you played
goalie whereas the child is usually
likely to know that the dad is more
likely to say well you know what did you
do that maybe was not um so good as a
goalie what do you think you can do
that's different with it with the uh
with the coach next time did you ask the
coach directly why she or he took you
away from being goalie and so um that's
more of a problem-solving approach or a
problem and you think that's associated
with the Positive developmental
consequence for IQ
I think it is it's not that lower IQ
fathers tend to get divorced More Often
by any chance is it well we well we do
know that that mothers are who are well
educated are far more likely about 90 of
divorces um come from mothers are
initiated by the plaintiff is the mother
um and when the mother is well educated
she has other sources of income other
sources of education and um and security
and she also knows
um obviously that in the family courts
she's far more likely to have the
children and the father is far less like
you know she's more likely to have the
right to the children he's more likely
to have to fight for the children
um and um and so there's all sorts of
Dynamics going on there but I think the
most important thing here to understand
is that like we were talking a bit
before about teasing there are so many
developmental
um advantages to a lot of the things
that dads do but I want to really make
it clear that ads don't say to moms
things like I'd like to Rough House with
the children because it will increase
the children's empathy I'd like to Rough
House with the children because it will
increase their social skills I'd like to
tease with the children because it will
increase their social abilities to to
have to right God who could stand to be
married to someone who did that yes
and the result of that is that you know
moms can't hear what dads don't say and
one of the so one of the reasons why
communication about what is and dads
need to take responsibility for reading
about uh what there is uh that we do
that's differently and what the outcomes
are of the things that we do differently
so I've never heard of a father say to a
mother you know the teasing that I do
um with with our daughter or our son you
know when we go into when kids go into
the workplace and they haven't learned
how to be they haven't learned teasing
they feel the teasing is sort of an
insult
right they're touching they're touchy
and they can't take a joke with a sense
of humor exactly we have very explicit
discussions about such things in my
household
so I mean what I wanted the kids to be
inoculated against casual
insult
you have to take that with a sense of
humor or or it just mounts I've seen
people who can't respond to that initial
testing you know and it's partly what
people do to see if you're socialized
you see because people want to socialize
with people who are about as socialized
as them and so what they'll do first is
throw out some teasing and see what
happens and if it evokes a playful
response then they know that the person
that they're dealing with can be relied
on to play and has been reasonably
socialized you're hitting the nail right
of the head of the Commerce of
masculinity is the the trading of wit
covered put downs and Men learn as they
grow up that I think probably the reason
that that happens is because men learn
that if you can handle if you can't
handle criticism you're not going to be
successful and if you're not going to be
successful you're also unpredictable
because it means that if something small
and upsetting comes along you're going
to get big and upset and that isn't what
you want you don't want someone who's
going to get upset about something small
it's it's too dangerous in a crisis
absolutely and so from a male point of
view from most men's point of view
um the feeling is if you can't be teased
you can't be trusted right right exactly
you can't be really respected and here's
the type of problems that that creates
in the workplace so if you're if you're
dead talking to your to the mom about
teasing children help her see how this
evolves into the workplace so in the
workplace
um a girl a woman oftentimes may get
teased and she will interpret that
teasing like you know
um did you I see you have a new dress on
are you uh did you get that to flirt
with the boss or do you have you know
you're just um you must addressed in the
dark last night
um something like that that's something
if you say to a guy they come back at
you with some funny counter uh Point
like you know well that would be typical
for a short man to say uh a version of
that and and and and the men with each
other when they can tease each other
like that and play with each other that
means that they're beginning to trust
that man and move them into their into
their league of people they can respect
and Trust whereas if the woman hears
something like that comment she might
feel it's a it's a sense it means that
she's being discriminated against in the
workplace so she takes that perspective
and says now that would be a
particularly true I suspect if she
didn't have a lot of masculine presence
in her life exactly and she know that
girls who don't have brothers are much
more likely to be raped
yeah I I didn't know that that's
interesting and I do believe that um and
because a lot of the and this does
confirm a number of things that I've
heard of people who are experts in that
area and that's very very deeply sad and
particularly what's what's reinforcing
this you were talking about how things
in today's culture sort of reinforce it
so let's say this girl this woman is new
to work and she's being tested out by
being teased and she feels really
insulted and she interprets the teasing
as discrimination against her as opposed
to interpreting the teasing as an
attempt to include her uh to include her
yeah exactly nicely so she goes to HR
it's an invitation to play it's an
invitation to play it's an indication if
you're skilled at it right I mean that's
I mean a tease can go too far and then
it's insulting but but the really good
tease is right on the edge right and
then that's also it's also a compliment
to the person who's designed to receive
it because you're are facing them with
the proposition that they can tolerate a
comment they're sophisticated enough to
know when a comment is right on the edge
and they're resilient enough to tolerate
it and respond in kind so it's an it's a
compliment of the highest order to push
like that it is so important that you
said that and that's exactly right
that's exactly what teasing does test
for and that's exactly what men who
tease each other are testing for to see
if the if the playfulness could be met
with playfulness it can be met with even
a a greater challenge that requires them
to participate in the process but
institutionally today we've taken you
think part of that's crucial to IQ
development I I do think that's
interesting because I mean that teasing
banter is a form of of of of what
dynamic wit it's like a Dance I mean
some cultures have really perfected that
you get there's subcultures in England
particularly where that's
elevated to an art form and and you see
that in places like Newfoundland and
Canada as well and and in Alberta as
well I would say in the rural areas in
particular yes absolutely and so now
what we've done is institutionalized
this teasing as a problem so the woman
upset that she's being discriminated
against goes to HR and says I was
discriminated against what he said to me
right thus failing a test in in a more
profound way because one of the things
you do when you're in elementary school
in junior high school in high school for
that matter and then in the workplace is
tease someone and see if they run off to
find a figure of Authority or whether
they can deal with it themselves because
you assume that if they have to run off
and find a figure of authority that
they're not mature enough to solve their
own problems that's exactly right and so
what we so the woman reports it to HR
and HR really is no longer HR really
should be called her because it focuses
almost always a complaint by the woman
about usually a man and the do you know
what the stats are in proportion of
workplace complaints that are brought
forth by women compared to men I know
the OCR stats of the office of civil
rights stats about on complaining is
about I think it was
there's a fellow named Joseph who's done
the research on that and I think he said
it was like 19 to 1. 19 complaints by
women about men for age one complaint by
men about a woman
right and that's funny because you know
the men probably generate the grounds
for complaints more often being more
disagreeable and the women are more
sensitive to the uh negative
consequences being less emotionally
stable more more neurotic so it's that's
a place where men and women don't feed
back so well to one another you know and
it's unfortunate but that that well I
have wondered you know if men and women
can inhabit the same workplace over time
we don't know that I mean I've been
called reprehensible for even bringing
that up as an issue but it's not like we
know
we haven't the data aren't in we've only
been working together in some sense for
50 years and there's plenty of evidence
for sex segregation it seems to be the
the norm rather than the exception that
you know once a gender a sex starts to
dominate a field that that dominance
becomes more and more predominant until
it becomes almost total you see that
with engineering you see it with nursing
those are extreme cases but it certainly
does happen well they're not as Extreme
as bricklaying which is like all men but
women have you know women haven't moved
into the bricklaying domain so we don't
know what would happen if they did they
won't but so we won't know but you know
you know and this the the the the
challenge here is is really enormous
because the um in the sexual area
um it's very rare that a woman is
interested in dating somebody at work
who is earning less uh than she is
um and um is not doesn't have as high
status and use a great majority of women
that I've seen that have uh that were
single when they entered the workplace
and then married somebody a significant
percentage of them have married somebody
in the workplace but the great majority
of that significant percentage have
married somebody at least at their level
and usually above them yeah it's
hypergamy right and it characterizes
women with regard to
um potential for generous earning
essentially and unsurprisingly I think
it's an attempt to balance the economic
scales because women take the brunt of
pregnancy and and the brunt of the first
year of of child rearing I would say as
well so and they make themselves
vulnerable as a consequence so they need
to redress that inequality
and that's how they do it and but there
are consequences to that that are very
severe in the socioeconomic in the
social spheres absolutely and then when
the woman when a man above her does take
um interest in her and and it's explicit
about it
um you know it it can either result in
courtship or a law court and so a
courtship of one form or the other yes
or and yes one courtship of one form or
the other and so it's a really uh it's
it's and and what the biggest problem
with that's happened in the last 15 20
years especially since hashtag me too
um is that's
um I have not yet spoken to a single
um corporate CEO
um who has not said some version of the
following to me you know Warren I used
to love mentoring women
um but I have a wife and I have children
there's no way shape or form that I will
Mentor a woman today right
um well it was increasingly insisted
upon in in my workplace at the
University that if I ever had a female
in the room with me that the door be
open
I mean and as soon as that's the rule
you're you're done you have to start
rethinking everything can you travel
with your graduate students can you be
in the same Hotel
etc etc etc as soon as you have to start
thinking about those things
that means the risk has become so great
that you're much less likely to engage
in such activity
and mentoring is a very intimate
relationship so it's it's
it is and it's oftentimes does I mean
many men are particularly inspired to
mentor to a woman who's younger that
that is attractive and many younger and
attractive women are uh increase their
um their caring about and their love for
a man who is who is who they see as a
result of his mentoring yeah well you
know across cultures women prefer men
who are about four years older there's
some variation and that actually is one
of the things that is moderated in the
Scandinavian culture so that age Gap is
less rather than more in the
Scandinavian cultures but that goes
along with the genuine General tendency
to to hypergamy which is preference for
a mate who's at or above you in the
social hierarchy yes or the
socioeconomic hierarchy it's really the
social hierarchy though
which create enormous problems in
different cultures like in China when we
do analyzes of the dating the most
popular dating site in China you see
that um women want a very high
percentage of women I think it's in the
92 to 93 tile approximately of women uh
want men who own homes and own cars but
of the people on The Dating Sites who
are males only a very small percentage
of them own homes and cars right well
and we should also point out that women
aren't actually going for the home or
the car they're going for the ability to
produce the home in the car of course
right they're using them as secondary
markers for competent for competence
essentially but and then they you know
you cite an interesting stat here too
which which I thought was worth talking
about
um
date on on who should pay the bill on
the first date
um 72 percent of women
think that a man should pay the full
bill
on the first date now remember they've
already selected this man and what that
means is that he's likely to be at or
above them in the socioeconomic
hierarchy and perhaps slightly older so
you know in some sense they can afford
he can afford to pay better than she can
but in any case 82 percent of men think
the same
and so men are playing the hypergamy
game even more uh intensely than women
are at least with regards to that
particular statistic
so
and this gets into the psychology of the
pay Gap because many women feel okay
about that because they feel like okay
men earn more than I do for the same
work
um when when we and in fact that is not
really accurate here is what is accurate
of fathers earn more than moms do the
pay Gap is not men women the pay Gap is
dads versus moms and when dads become
dads uh they're far more likely to give
up the things that they love to do that
pay less and do the things that they
like to do a lot less
um you know quit that musician gig that
paid much less and do something
responsible quote unquote like selling
product y
um yeah that's also in line with the
data that show that you know most most
young men many many young men abuse
alcohol
most of them stop when around 27 but
that's also when they get married and so
they they stop engaging in primary
gratification and that's another example
of that delay of gratification as far as
I'm concerned that ability or
willingness to sacrifice yes it is also
part of your whole your whole rule about
the you know it's important to have
stable structures but it's also
important to have flexibility in
structures and part of you know it's so
funny that we it's so rare that we can
have a real conversation about this
because let's say that the pay Gap well
you know it's certainly not obvious what
degree the pay Gap is caused by female
hypergamy right if men demanded of their
dating partners that they earned more
than they do my guess is that there'd be
a pay Gap in favor of women
because men are incentivized to earn
more because if they don't the the
consequences on the in the sexual Market
but it's not the sexual it's the
um intimate interpersonal market right
to not be cynical about it because it's
it's not all short-term mating that
people are motivated by for quite the
contrary well they're motivated to take
the dangerous is more dangerous less
desirable farther away from from home
and family and interest for that matter
jobs because the payoff is
disproportionately large for men who do
so and you see that you know you see and
it's exaggerated at the upper end of the
distribution as well which is what you
pointed out with regards to the dating
sites you know like 70 percent of men
are rated as below the 50th percentile
in attractiveness by women and so not
only are there rewards for earning more
there are disproportionate awards for
men for earning more and that goes along
with the proposition that we put forward
at the beginning of this conversation I
think that was recorded as well that
you know the most admired people are men
but the least admired people are men as
well and there's a lot more least
admired men than there are most admired
men and that's true in in brutal force
on the dating scene on the websites
absolutely and and as I said part of the
reason that this is sort of all
Justified is because you know after all
men have privilege and you know and men
are you know are and the pay Gap is
really a reflection of the fact that you
know men do less work and earn the same
or um and yes which is complete bloody
nonsense that's just not true that's
that there is a gap but the the reason
for the Gap is very very complex and
involves many factors including the ones
we discussed here which you take apart
so nicely in your book why men earn more
I think you have 13 reasons that men
earn more you know that's quite a few
reasons and privilege isn't one of them
it's actually 25 differences between the
choices that men tend to make and the
choices that women tend to make 25 25
differences are things that do lead to
men earning more money but could you
list a few of those now because it's
such an interesting it's such an
interesting topic men are more likely to
take hazardous jobs they're more likely
to take jobs like logging or Trucking
they're more likely to take jobs that
that require them to work weekends or
evenings they're more likely to take
jobs that um that have very little
people contact uh like being an engineer
and but most men do like people contact
but many of the jobs with less people
contact like being an engineer
mathematician tend to pay less
the men are more likely to
um let's see e a work a longer a longer
hours yeah so the U.S Bureau of Labor
Statistics when you hear somebody works
full-time that only means that they work
35 hours a week or more not 40 hours a
week was what you usually think of as
full-time well the average person who
works 44 hours per week makes twice the
money as somebody who works 35 hours a
week it's twice I see well I remember
one of your stats which was I think 10
percent more working hours is 20 percent
more income something like that but
that's a much more dramatic step
statistic 44 hours is twice as valuable
as 35 hours yes
and men are much more likely to work
that 44 hours or more per week right and
thus not be there for their children as
is exposed in Family Court exactly and
and that of course is very fascinating
it's what I call the father's Catch-22
that dad's learned to love the family by
having to be away from the love of their
family but when the a Pew Research
Center asked dads who were full-time
working dads would you prefer to be
Maine full-time working or if you had
the option of leaving your job full-time
and being full-time with the children
which would you prefer 49 of dads said
who worked full-time so these are not
sort of loser dads or dad's not inclined
to work 49 percent of dads who work
full-time said that they would prefer to
be home with their children full time
and maybe work a little bit or not
outside of the home
and um and yet that uh that question has
never it almost never even asked of that
it's usually when middle and upper
middle class people are married and they
have children uh the mom generates three
options option one is to work full-time
option two is to be full-time with the
children option three is to do some
combination of both and dads you know
they have three options too option one
is to work full-time option two is to
work full-time and option three is to
work full-time or more accurately
um if they're a working class person to
work two jobs if they're um more of a
white collar worker they'll tend to sort
of work more hours at the job that
they're doing and so that type of these
types of differences are not seen and
the easiest way to see these is that um
women who have never been married and
never had children they earn 117 of what
men who have never been married and
never had children earned it's only when
men have get married and have children
that they begin to do what you were
talking about before and start taking on
a commitment a new responsibility okay
so your claim your claim it's no wonder
you're so popular your claim is
essentially that men don't earn more
because of privilege they earn more
because they take responsibility not not
that women don't I'm not saying that but
I'm not saying that they're taking
responsibility in a different way
because they're focused on the children
and maybe they sacrifice their career
for that and maybe that's what they want
to do but it doesn't matter they're
still doing it but
the reason that men earn more is because
they're earning more for the people they
love even yes even politically um
liberal people who normally believe in
minimal sex roles uh when it when it
comes to the children being born uh the
mothers are much more likely to sort of
even if they're working full-time
remember we said full-time is 35 hours a
week they're much more likely to go from
maybe working 45 45 hours a week before
to doing a few things that are different
one is to uh working uh not only fewer
hours but finding a job that is closer
to home so they can be more flexible and
we see this the best way I think to
understand the difference in the pay Gap
is to look at what happens with women
who own their own businesses versus men
who own their own businesses so take two
groups that are quite equal they both
have mbas
um and they've um and so they're
committed obviously to work the
Rochester Institute of Technology
studying both groups of men and women
with both mbas who who own their own
business women earned only 49 of what
men earned and so the the Assumption
when they started this was wow women who
own their own business that will you
know they don't have the Discrimination
of um you know a discriminating male
bosses and so therefore they'll be
valued more they'll probably earn as
much or more than their male
counterparts and the answer was no so
the Rochester Institute of Technology
then investigated that further and they
asked women and men which is the most
important values for you in owning your
own business uh 70 72 percent of the men
said the most important value for me was
greater income only 29 of women said it
was greater income the women wanted more
time they wanted time they wanted
stability and they wanted safety also
men were much less concerned about
safety than uh women were which is a why
you know all of your has why Uber
drivers make more when they're men at
least in part yeah
and higher risk tolerance yes and I mean
and if you know let's say you don't have
a college education or even dropped out
of high school and so if you're you
might um get a job as a as a garbage
collector you have to get up early in
the morning
um it's dirty it's hazardous
um and yet a female who um is has an art
degree a master's degree in art
um they earn less than that garbage
collector
um and partially it's because you know
people tend to need the garbage picked
up more than they need a new piece of
art and so these are so many of the 25
differences that are
um between men and women but the good
news about that how did we get to in a
mistake Warren where the given 25
differences is a lot of differences and
it doesn't make for a very big
difference in pay by the way
um even the most radical
proponents of the unequal pay Theory are
struggling to come up with a figure that
exceeds 15 percent
so 25 differences amounting to 15
percent isn't that much of a difference
um but you know if the data are so clear
that it's fathers who are driving this
and it's relatively self-evident I would
say if it was single guys that was
driving this you could make a case that
was for selfish pleasure seeking
purposes right and that would fit pretty
nicely into the privilege narrative
right power hungry greedy selfish
short-sighted men with privilege make
more money it's like well wait a minute
it's Father's oh so why are they doing
that well and never married women who
have never had children earn 117 percent
of what never married men who have never
had children or
never married women who have never had
children they are more likely to plan
for their careers and they do earn more
and what is most astonishing is that
never married women who have never had
children have earned more than never
married men who have never had children
since the 1970s just now it's 117 more
and so exactly what you said is true it
is not uh never married women with with
never who have never had children they
tend to focus on their careers whereas
different married men who have never had
children they're much more likely to be
able to do something like music or art
or and and gay men historically have
often been very successful in art
because they've been usually never
married men who have never had children
and they've been able to afford to do
things that were less likely and
dependable to produce money oh I've
never heard that explanation before
that's
that's that's quite an explanation so so
let's delve into that a little bit more
deeply the the time and and money issues
so
when women
rank order their preferences when they
have options so these are the middle
class upper middle class women you
talked about they're going to go for
more time and I presume that they want
more time to spend that with their kids
that's been my observation that's the
number one thing okay and then men are
making more money instead but it's
fathers that are making more money so
they're making more money for what
reason is it like exactly is it for
their kids is it for their wife and kids
is it so that their wife
maintains her attractiveness her
attraction to the man because that's a
that's a big issue that no one ever
talks about right I mean within
marriages I've seen this many times
within marriages if the male takes a
status hit
he also takes a attractiveness hit and
it's a severe hit I've seen this many
many times and no one will ever talk
about it but it's definitely the case
here's the best way to understand that
bridge the man takes a status hit
um he starts losing respect for himself
his wife starts losing a little bit of
respect for him wondering whether or not
that this is going to result in a job
down the line or whether some promise or
belief that he has is going to manifest
now if she's really the man he thought
she was she thought he was
he feels that less respect and a woman
it's and I think every woman will agree
with this it's almost impossible for a
woman to love a man she doesn't respect
and there's this I think it's that the
opposite is true too but maybe the
grounds for respect differ the grounds
for respective yeah and also a man
there's more flexibility with a man on
the respect issue there may not be more
flexibility in terms of first Falling in
Love on the beauty issue women have
their burden that they have to uh that
they have to live up to as well but the
but on the respect issue
um it's very challenging for if a woman
begins to lose respect she begins to
lose love and Men sense this and
therefore they oftentimes brag or boast
or uh or you know uh or overstate their
potential in order to be able to make
themselves attractive and we see this in
so many levels in the lowest land level
um Lois Lane you know she had no
interest in Clark Kent but she fell in
love with Superman and once she fell in
love with Superman she wanted Superman
to be able to cry and express emotions
but the man who did cry and express
emotions and feelings and sensitive
Clark Kent she has zero interest in
um you know women are oftentimes say I'm
opposed to war but look at the she's
much more likely to fall in love with
the Officer and a Gentleman than she is
the private in the pacifist
um and you know and they they we talk
about this even in high school most
everybody's gone to high school and most
high schools have football games and um
and the and the women are the
cheerleaders to go First and Ten do it
again for the guy that scores the
touchdown
um or cat either by throwing the pass or
catching the pass and if the guy feels
like it's too dangerous for him to play
football and he leaves the football team
it's very rare that the foot that the
cheerleader says you know I notice how
well how good your listening skills were
when you were in the Huddle and how warm
and tender you are I want to continue
cheering for you no she tends to cheer
for his replaceable part another number
seven risking his life
um with a concussion or a spinal cord
injury no this is none this is
non-trivial
um Behavior I mean because you look at
the the football team I've been writing
about that recently the football example
is particularly interesting especially
because it's such a Trope in American
especially in American popular culture
everybody knows the story right
um but what's so interesting too is the
men will on the team will Elevate their
best player to the highest position of
status despite the fact that they all
take a hit in terms of sexual
attractiveness by doing so I mean maybe
you know being on a winning team
elevates a rising tide that's all boats
well definitely but but it's still the
case that they'll take a a relative hit
within the confines of the team to elect
the man to the position where he's most
likely to receive the favors of
Attraction from the most valuable the
most desired women yes exactly so I mean
trying to puzzle out the role of sexual
selection thinking that through because
men men select the women that men select
the men that women select absolutely
very very interesting to watch that
happen and yeah absolutely and you'll
see this you know both sexes figure out
very carefully and when people say well
men are more competitive than women
that's not really true
um both sexes are very competitive uh
for getting having the goodies that lead
them to be have the greatest amount of
choice so women will compete with other
women about how they dress what their
dresses look like if a woman is at a
party and a uh and she's interested in
one or two of the guys at that party in
a really attractive woman comes through
the door she will assess what her
chances are and what you know what um
how she should position herself to make
sure she gets the contact with the man
that she really wants to make contact
with and the men will do the same type
of thing around
um you know the things that they feel
will lead a woman to be attracted to
them well this also makes it very it's
very
difficult for men to figure out this is
another reason why I question the
long-term viability of not not that I
truly question it but these questions
arise in my mind the long-term viability
of mixed sex workplaces
the rules for competing with other men
are pretty clear
the rules for competing with women are
not clear at all yes
because if you're a loser you're still a
loser but if you're a winner you're just
so easily a bully
so it isn't obvious what what how men
can negotiate that well they have to
negotiate it through negotiation that's
the only possible outcome but it
definitely makes things much much more
complex and it's it's also it's complex
at least in part because as you just
pointed out within the Sexes the
competition is about different things so
or sorry between the Sexes no no within
the Sexes the competition is about
different things so when a woman
competes with a status with st with a
man for status she's competing for male
status not female status and so what to
make of that well why that would be
rewarding to her isn't that obvious and
I think that's part of the reason why so
many women bail out of high pressure
situations jobs when they hit their 30s
I mean part of it is that they would
rather be with their family and and for
obvious reasons but the the the other
unspoken elephant in the room is always
well why would it be particularly
rewarding for a woman to attain status
in the masculine hierarchy what what
benefit does that confer on her well
more income that's one of them but that
confers no attractiveness Advantage
whereas for men it accrues a tremendous
attractiveness Advantage it's definitely
a disproportionate male versus female I
would say though that if tooth if a
woman is if a man has a choice between
two women and they're both equally
attractive and their personalities are
pretty much the same Etc and one is more
successful than the other the man is
likely to be more attracted to the more
successful woman but he's also likely to
be afraid of rejection
yes definitely definitely feel that that
more successful woman will have more
options uh that she will have more
options she will have more options and
she'll have higher demands as well
because she's going to want to mate
that's the real issue is that's where
the rejection issue comes in it's not
even necessarily that she has more
options it's that because she's more
successful her criteria for what
constitutes acceptable are going to be
elevated they may even be elevated to
the point of impossibility for her
exactly and and the real fear here that
the man has is the fear of being
rejected
yes definitely and I I think that that
well I've made light of that uh by
teasing my my class my my my students
you know I said well what's the what's
the old what's the joke well you're
you're perfectly suitable as a companion
but in no way should your genetic
material be allowed to propagate itself
into the Next Generation
right that's that's the core of
rejection and it's no it's it's it cuts
to the Bone
it cuts to the Bone and I I I it isn't
obvious that that
that's sufficiently understood how
terrified men are of female rejection
well that's part of the turning to
pornography I would say
and the advantage of dating sites like
Tinder because of the rejection is taken
out of the game essentially or its
hidden mask Tinder is a is a
revolutionary technology because it
Alters the the reward structure reward
and Punishment structure and dating I
mean
it's a it's incendiary
and named properly
pornography is basically accessed to a
variety of attractive women without fear
of rejection at a price you can afford
and right and with with the with the
commensurate responsibility
no except to yourself right but that's
easily foregone in the moment and the
challenge of it is that the more so the
boys who are usually doing less young
men who are doing less well in school
who are not the or not the football
players that are getting the 15
different women coming up to them and
risking rejection
um or not the student body presidents
who are not standing out one way or the
other or not getting great grades not
part of the Honor Society Etc uh the the
non-standout men the ones that are
oftentimes dad deprived that have
minimal postpone gratification and so on
and they tend to do badly in school or
drop out of school those boys feel like
losers and they they know that women
tend to not date losers they tend to
take winners and um and they end up in
the unemployed and what women are
looking for um forgot uh and and much
more likely to be in their families um
live with their families 66 percent more
oh yes that's another statistic young
men between 25 and 31 or 66 percent more
likely than young women to be living
with their parents yes and more young
men are living with a parent than with a
partner yes and they and you don't find
women
um looking
um in there looking for men that are
living in their parents basement or
looking for men no well that's just a
joke which is why you you know you could
insert it there as a cliche everyone
understands exactly what that means it
means Failure to Launch it means Peter
Pan right it's a joke and and and those
women are therefore more like those guys
rather I'm much more likely to turn to
pornography because
um they sense they're being rejected by
women
um and then they turn to this beautiful
woman that they can be turned on by the
challenge with pornography is that the
more you get into it the more you tend
to be stimulated by more and more risky
things and more and more salacious
things or you know or things that are
yeah well that's because no novelty
enhances enhances pleasure
so that's the addictive element of it
precisely and then the female who is
interested in that guy and does come
over to you know to be with him
physically she often feels like this guy
is like you know more interested in
something that happened in the
pornographic of things that he's been
watching she feels like an object um
like and because she is being treated
like an object well and also those are
the men who aren't going to be
particularly sophisticated in their
their treatment of women because how can
they be they have no experience
precisely and so the the pornography
ends up haunting them on multiple levels
um and and leads them to often turn back
to pornography to avoid continuing
rejection and only convinces them that a
real life woman isn't somebody that he
would fail at one level or another with
and so it's a really
um have you ever seen Robert crumbs
representations of bird-headed women no
you don't have it Robert Crum is an
underground cartoonist and he was the
feature of a documentary which you
should you and everybody else who's
listening to this should definitely
watch huh it's it's absolutely it's the
best documentary I've ever seen about
anything ever it's and he he draws these
women they're Pro he was a loser in high
school by his own admission by every
single category you could possibly
generate and so it's a study in loser
psychology but it's really complex
because he was a loser who was extremely
intelligent and unbelievably creative
and who had two brothers who were
probably more intelligent more creative
than him although also more
psychopathological and then he became
successful he was one of the
establishers of
of underground cartooning back in the in
the 1960s and and and and and spawned
arguably even graphic novel you know I
mean he's he's a major player in that in
that Niche and and the documentary is a
brilliant analysis of the relationship
between failure and success and sexual
failure and sexual success because in
one more memorable scene he talks about
he drew this card when he was a high
school kid of a heart being ripped apart
when he got rejected by this girl that
that or by all girls he said he was
beneath contempt he could he wasn't even
in the category of comprehensible dating
partner right he was outside the game
entirely so he's rejected by the
feminine as such he draws these pictures
of bird-headed women with teeth you know
and they're powerful big thighs big big
uh big rear end like powerful physically
powerful intimidating women like mothers
draws sometimes these characters of
little tiny men climbing up the legs of
these huge tree-like women but they're
very aggressive and and and and and uh
domineering and the reason for that at
least in part is because every woman he
ever
approached was rejecting an aggressive
in the extreme treated him with nothing
but contempt and then he says in an
unbelievably memorable piece of the
documentary
um that all changed when I got
successful and you can just hear the
resentment and the bitterness in his
voice even though it did change and he
wasn't that old when he became
successful he was in his mid-20s you
know plenty of time to be on the outs
completely and to experience life at the
bottom of the male dominance hierarchy
and and even farther down the female
dominance hierarchy let's say in terms
of desirable men it's a it's called Crum
the documentary I would highly recommend
it and it's it's absolutely brilliant
study and and he had
well he had an authoritarian father and
a indulgent mother and she plays uh a
key role in the documentary and uh it's
it's awful it's it's awful it's a it's a
study in Freudian Psychopathology that's
deep beyond belief I've seen it like 40
times showing it to my classes and
walking through it clip by clip but
but anyways it's a study you don't see
the world from the perspective of Down
and Out male loser you know there are
subcultures that that sort of exist
there but this is the this is the only
examination of that place in the world
I've ever seen that I thought really
really nailed it the the documentarist
was a friend of the family so he and
Charles Brothers one of them ended up a
sexual offender who lived on the Streets
of San Francisco and the other committed
suicide by drinking furniture polish
when he was like 55. after being bullied
terribly in high school and living in
his mother's basement essentially for
his entire life
oh
awful awful but you know you watch the
documentary it's not it's not like
people really
there's you you generate some compassion
for the people in the documentary and
what they've gone through but I wouldn't
say that compassion is what's primarily
elicited by the documentary and that
goes back to this discussion we had
right at the beginning about
you know what kind of
empathy we have for
the men who aren't making it and the
answer seems to be very very little
let's go to social policy with that we
might ask okay in light of this what do
we do and I would say this is what I've
recommended I've recommended to young
men that they take that these are the
facts on the ground and they're not
going to change and that if you're being
rejected chronically by women or if
you're terrified out of your mind about
that and and perhaps rightly so
you should take a good hard look at
yourself and see what it is that you
have to offer and so I are you as
educated as you could be are you working
you know are you looking for a job at
least are you trying to get out of your
parents house are you taking the steps
necessary to become gainfully employed
productive generous and attractive and
you know that Tangles us back up with
something we also talked about in the
beginning which is the criticisms that
have been directed my way by men which
is well you're asking men to live up to
a stereotype that essentially
um undermines and devalues the vast
majority of them you're part of the
problem not part of the solution and
your emphasis on a responsible marriage
given the state of current family law is
nothing short of reprehensible and so
you know my Approach is
do what you can at the individual level
to put yourself in the game but there's
there's much more to the story than not
absolutely this is really complex
because the good news is there's a lot
you can do to choose a woman who is the
right woman
um and so for example looking at uh when
when you go both both go out to dinner
um does she is she open to paying is she
if she if she isn't paying does she does
she cook a dinner for you the next time
around
um how does she treat the waiter uh
somebody that can't do her um any any
good
I'll ask her about her uh former
relationships
um how they broke how they broke up and
who was at fault was that is there any
accountability and responsibility on her
part of course ask these same questions
of yourself as well especially about uh
former relationships and how they broke
up
um and um and so that's um so choosing
the right woman is probably so what are
you looking for there you're looking for
um
generosity you're looking for kindness
down the hierarchy right so that's how
does she treat people who are social
inferiors so to speak at least in that
context like waiters and then with
regards to previous relationships is she
capable of some self-analysis or is is
it always the guy's fault that reminds
me of that Atlantic Monthly article one
of them I'm a unfortunately can't
remember who wrote it but it was this
woman in her late 40s detailing out all
the high quality men that she had
rejected many many many men by her own
um account and during the entire article
there wasn't any recognition whatsoever
of any time when it might have been her
it was like I read these 40 men didn't
live up to my standards it's like well
after the fifth one didn't you start
thinking maybe the problem was on the
other side of the dating table but the
answer was obviously no and she was
obviously still single so but so what do
you you looking for there exactly and
why did you why did you bring that up at
that point
well because one of the ways that you
can be involved in the game of marriage
in a way that is positive is by making
the choice of the woman differently than
what we tend to do we and many men look
at a woman she's beautiful
and and our desire to be sexual with her
leads us to sort of okay we'll pay for
dinner we'll promise this we'll go we'll
go here we'll go there and we should
point out too I just want to point out
something I talked to Randy Thornhill
recently one of the world's preeminent
biologists and before we get to thinking
that this sexual attractiveness is
nothing more than mere shallow
mindedness and impulsive gratification
is all the cues of sexual attractiveness
are tightly associated with physical
health and fecundity which is the
ability to procreate and so even if men
are blinded by
Beauty which which I do believe is true
enough
there are reasons for that at the
deepest possible level still have to do
with the desire to continue the human
species so it's it's shallow in one
sense but not in another but your point
is there are other markers that are
character illogical that are more subtle
that need to be taken into account yes
both sexes have very
um huge reproductive draws I mean every
from an insect right on up through human
beings women tend to procreate and have
children with it with the out the alpha
male
yeah a good example of this is Buck Elks
and among Buck Elks the females 85
percent of them will have um reproduced
with the with the email that has the
biggest wreck
um but then and that but what it takes
to get that biggest rack is an
exhaustion of 30 of the minerals
nutrients and um calcium um in the buck
elk uh so the second that he reproduces
if he doesn't get rid of his rack
immediately he's likely to die before
winter sets in and he's able to
replenish the um the nutrients and the
and the minerals and so on so his his
his rack was very productive for being
able to procreate it was very productive
for being able to attract the female but
it was also his weakness that is and
that's very symbolic of men that men's
weakness is our facade of strength
because it was strength because we could
use that rack or they not me but the
buck Elks could use that rack to you
know to to get rid of other Predators or
people that were the female didn't want
to protect the female when she was um
you know creating the child and so on
but once but he was also being used uh
for being part of the next generation's
benefit of producing the next
generation's machine and as you said
when we you know we once we have
children we really live for the next
generation and so now then the the next
question becomes
as humans are we or do we want to create
more options for ourselves and so and
are we at a point now where survival is
mastered enough in the middle and upper
middle class that we have them then we
are chosen merely for our success and I
think the best explanation of that um
comes in Japan where the Millennials in
Japan have a game called corrosia and of
course Karoshi means death at the desk
or death from overwork and the the game
each person has a little Karoshi figure
and they compete to get to the top of
the ladder it might be the political
ladder might be the economic ladder it
might be the religious ladder and and as
they compete to get to the top of the
ladder the one who gets to the top of
the ladder first commits suicide not in
real life but in the game and the point
that the Japanese Millennials are
communicating with each other
um is that the um that what we did to
become that successful man who was it
who was the most attracted who was the
most able able to be eligible for sex
and for love is we unbecame a human
doing
climbing to the top of the ladder
um I was and we I'm sorry we unbecame a
human being we didn't even think of
ourselves as a human being that's why
we're committing suicide we have just
just by competing to be at the top of
the ladder we've worried about what
position we wanted how to have working
more hours
um pleasing the boss pleasing the
corporation
um not not selling something we wanted
or doing something we wanted and we
we've lost we never even considered
ourselves as a human being and so now we
Japanese Millennials are going to start
looking at the um the loss of ourselves
as human doings uh the loss of ourselves
rather as human beings and that is um I
and that's the in my opinion the where
we need to consider going that as we
have children there's this Balancing Act
of
helping our children see the value of
being that artist that painter that's
you know doing what you love to do
combined with is it creating enough
income to be responsible to your family
to do that and um and and yes it will
lose you some women but if you're
developing emotional skills and
emotional intelligence that may not
attract as many women as the football
player that risks his life in the spinal
cord injury but it may attract the type
of woman you want and be for me between
marriages when when I would go out with
women they would you know I would share
with them what I did but part of that
was sort of redefining equality for them
and it was not offering to pay for the
bill the whole bill on the first date it
was um talking to them about the options
like I can pay on the first date and
maybe you can do something like cook the
dinner for me on the second day uh type
of thing but I'll tell you many many
times I feared not many times I feared I
know a few times that I said something
like that
um that I knew there was going to be no
sex that evening whereas otherwise it
probably would have been and so um you
know it's a it's a risk that you take
inside of yourself but for me what I
wanted to select for was a woman who
wanted me more for who I was and less
for what status I had or what
predictable status I had
so well what do you think what do you
think about the advice that I've
advice
I don't really think I give advice
exactly I'm trying to explore ideas and
that exploration has certain
consequences but certainly you know I do
and as is my role as a psychologist I do
you know encourage the people who are
reading me to do what they can with what
they have to the best of their ability
and I don't see that we have a a truly
viable alternative to
essentially classic
sex rules I know they're under pressure
for all sorts of different reasons
including the ones that you've outlined
but
but you know in some sense it's it's the
only game in town
now what can I mean there are things we
can do though you talked about
um the Japan for example where they've
really
um invested heavily in vocational
training which seems to me to be a
no-brainer it's like maybe without
having to revamp the entire relationship
between men and women we could say well
wouldn't it be good social policy for
everyone concerned to pay some attention
to the vast majority of men who
could use vocational training for
example as an Avenue to success in all
domains of life and why are we so unable
to do that when the Japanese can do it
yes and we we really are there are so
many things like that that we can do I
mean schools for example
um we could have one of the things I've
suggested to the White House both of the
Trump Administration and also under the
Biden Administration is starting a male
teacher Corps in which men are trained
to be teachers particularly in dad
deprived areas uh school districts and
exchange and they get free scholarships
um they get full scholarships for
college but yet in exchange for that
full scholarship for college they have
to serve three or four years as a
teacher in a debt in an in a school
district that has few male teachers
um another thing I've suggested to both
both and so you think that's I'm
thinking of objections to that selection
on the basis of gender let's say which
I'm you know pretty much temperamentally
opposed to but in some sense but this
this is a data driven
suggestion
the data suggests that there are areas
that we so it's differentiated it's not
ideologically driven it's a
differentiated solution there are
there's data indicating that the
provision of male role models in places
that are deprived of those
um the addition of male role models in
in the domains that are deprived of
those would be of benefit to everyone
concerned and so that's a targeted
social policy yes it's not an
ideological statement precisely it in
fact it's even more complex than that
the way that I've suggested it is that
you don't just get males like me I
consider myself more of a nurturer
connector male you also get more
traditional males so that that no matter
who your son is
um if you if you've grown up in a home
without a a male role model in the home
without a biological father particularly
in the home that you have that your son
no matter what he's prone for but his
unique self is that he's able to go to
find a role model find a role model that
is that is not just another nurture or
connector male but you know a
construction worker or a a man that
retired from a more of a um a profession
that was more traditional like a logger
or whatever whatever firefighter and
that your son is able to see that
possibility and then also the nurture
connector male as a possibility and so
that those things be offered another
suggestion that I I think is by far the
most important one that I made to both
administrations
um is the the importance of creating a
father Warrior program w-a-r-r
um and and because every gender you know
historically speaking as you as you read
in the boy Crisis book about the purpose
void that men have
um if by not no longer being as needed
as as soldiers and no longer being as
needed as full-time Breadwinners uh that
that the that the male have the option
of seeing himself
um as POS as possibly and involved in um
some and I lost where I was going with
that you were talking about the male
warrior idea and the need for purpose
and the social policy associated with
that yes and so I I what I've said
adjusted to both white houses is the
importance of creating a father Warrior
program where we're saying we need young
men to be full of fully involved learn
all the traits of being a responsible
emotionally connected father we need
women to to Value this in men as well
and so how would that work practically
speaking like I'm always thinking about
incentives like if we wanted to to
incentivize young men to be responsible
fathers which I think is exactly the
right role to be playing in every
virtually every role that a man plays is
the role of responsible father that's
the right rule not everyone but
virtually everyone how do you
incentivize that at the level of social
policy in in a practical way the number
one thing you do is you honor it so for
example when we had each generation had
its war and we said Uncle Sam needs you
when men are told they are needed that
gives them purpose that gives them drive
that gives them honor okay so how do we
Okay so how do we
um say fathers you are needed without
saying
single mothers you're inadequate because
that's the killer right that's the
killer right there because one implies
the other or that's the theory so you
know and this is uh this is a Shoal upon
which our culture is is Wrecking itself
is how do we reward behavior that is
eminently pro-social in the broadest
possible sense of the word without
punishing simultaneously punishing those
who are
excluded from that but struggling to do
the best under the conditions that have
presented themselves to them
we say to mothers two things one is we
honor mothers for being just overwhelmed
I mean I've never between marriages I
dated a number of almost all the women I
dated were women who had children the
word that they used most frequently was
overwhelm
um and the and so many of the mothers I
tended to date very bright women and so
they often felt caught between they
could do better
in work they could go further they could
go farther uh they weren't up to their
full level but and they could do better
as mothers they felt guilty as mothers
that they didn't have enough time for
their work or they didn't have enough
time yes yes guilt all the time there
are whatever they're doing is inadequate
exactly because they're not spending
enough time with your kids and they're
not spending enough time on their work
and both of those are true in some sense
absolutely and when they would they
would say I want to spend more time with
you but I'm caught between my work my
um the other trait and and and my and my
love interest and so um and so the
larger social message that needs to come
out come come out to men is Men Women
need your help women do not need not we
must not leave women uh to feel like
that so is it women or mothers mothers
I'm sorry no it's okay I mean it's just
it's important to get it right right I
mean absolutely women you might not need
men's help mothers you do and so do your
children right exactly so that you're so
that when you focus on Mothers being
overwhelmed every mother hears that when
you say to a mother when a mother hears
we're now going to be emphasizing the
importance of dads getting in there to
balance the picture with you to help you
out to be to to to not have you have the
entire burden mothers do hear that in a
positive way if you are simultaneously
saying which I think is 100 true that
you have just been that you've been
overwhelmed and you've been we respect
and honor the fact that you've you've
you've taken so much responsibility but
it is not helpful for you to have to be
pulled in so many directions it is not
helpful for the children it's not
optimal for the children because it's
not optimal for the children and it's
not helpful for the dad because the dad
is experiencing a purpose void of
feeling not needed and unwanted and men
with purpose voice AIDS I tend to look
for a purpose yes attention
and or look for and be a be negative
sometimes in their purpose and yes
definitely we need to help mothers and
fathers in the whole country understand
okay so this sounds great so why the
hell don't you have any traction with
Trump or with Biden because that pretty
much exhausts the options he says what's
going on well I you know with with Trump
they uh the Trump Administration said
they were very excited about it they
asked me to write up a speech that Trump
would give and he never gave it
um and so um with any idea why I mean
you'd think it would have been useful to
him you'd think given his constituency I
would have thought it would have been
100 useful to him you know I made the
case that there are about 20 million
parents that have children uh that um
boys rather that are in Failure to
Launch mode in some way shape or form
and that these mothers care more about
their sons and their care about their
party label that this could open or
themselves maybe even yes exactly and I
said this to both the Biden
Administration and the Trump
Administration the Biden Administration
was at least you know the 14 people that
I met with at the White House and with
HHS they said uh they were very all to a
person extremely enthusiastic with the
Democrats I've gotten much more of a
resistance when the White House Council
on gender policy was created and I
objected to that not including boys and
men and fathers
um and and said that you couldn't
possibly say you were in favor of
diversity and inclusion when you
excluded fathers and boys and men and
then they said that there was only 50
percent of the population yes yes or 49
is the percent whatever but you know but
it's one thing if you just say boys and
men are not important it's another thing
to say I'm in favor of diversity and
inclusion and then to say that the
second mission of the gender policy
council is to have racial Justice and
not understand that racial Justice can
that the single biggest group of people
who are having challenges in the cut in
the culture are black males and you know
if you if you go to a homeless city
which is a prime example of the
intersectionality that's being touted as
crucial to the development of our entire
culture
yes and here it's the prime example
perhaps indeed here because I think
black women are outperforming black men
on average in almost every metric yes
yes exactly so so you know well that
does beg the question
I mean what question does it beg you
know maybe one question it begs is where
exactly is the systemic racism
the the racism use a horrible phrase yes
I don't even want to go to a systemic
racism but if if the if the goal of the
White House gender policy Council
um is to have racial justice as it says
it is then you would but then they go
ahead and exclude uh black males from
racial Justice and only focus on black
females that is undermining racial
Justice because these as we know since
the 1965 with the Moynihan report
um the when we did studies of Inner City
crime and the fear when Patrick Moynihan
went to do that study was oh my goodness
he's going to be blaming black people is
going to be racist in fact he ended up
finding that it was not blacks per se
that were creating the crime it was just
that one 25 at that point in history in
1965 it was only 25 of the children who
were being raised in in families were
without father involvement and almost
all of the crimes that were being
committed were from the the dead
deprived children well now yeah that
hasn't changed that well that hasn't
changed except one thing has changed the
percentage of children who are raised in
dad deprived mode in the black community
has gone way up 25 what do you think of
the counter arguments to that that have
been raised recently that black men are
just as involved with your children it's
just that it's in ways that the you know
privileged White Community Jesus Christ
isn't recognizing and that that's just
another form that idea that you know the
black father is less engaged just just
another racist trope
no some black fathers there are um a
significant number of black fathers who
are involved with their children and
that is not where those children those
are not the children that are having
problems as long as the black mother is
also involved with the children
um so when whenever you have that um and
and of course the the social policies we
were talking about before you know of of
giving money to the women infants and
children program another program where
the the female who didn't the black
female or the white female who did not
have a father in the home she would be
helped if the father was not in the home
that did reinforce very significantly
the propensity of the mother to say
let's say the father wasn't earning very
much money so the father would if you if
you live away from me we'll be able to
get government support and so then that
right incentive for a living watch your
incentives right and we have to realize
today it's not just that the
African-American families now have more
than 70 percent of the children who are
raised with minimal or no father
involvement or what I call Dad deprived
children but also at the time of the
Moynihan report in 1965 there was only
3.2 percent of Caucasian families whose
children were living in dad deprived
situations now that's gone up to 35 in
Caucasian families and so we had this
enormous dead deprivation in it's in
these dad deprived families that watch
what's going to happen in the fall we're
going to have significant numbers of
school shootings and one of the things
that we see with School shooters in the
21st century every school shooter who
shot 10 or more people killed 10 or more
people every one of them was Dad
deprived we um when we look at when you
look at the prison population it's 93
male and the great majority of those
males are dad deprived males um I think
I've never experienced something that
was more touching for me than when I ran
for governor and I spoke of California
and I spoke around in a few prison
populations and I talked to these prison
populations almost all male the first
question I would ask is you know how
many of you had an involved father in
about three or four percent of the hands
of the prison population but would go up
and then I would talk to them whatever
that all the the things that dads do
that are different from what moms tend
to do like the teasing like the
postponed Veterinary occasion like the
rough housing and what the psychological
value of those were for the children's
growth and development and I had these
guys with tattoos and
um you know muscles that I'll never have
coming up to me and saying you're crying
and saying I never realized I was worth
anything I thought I was better off
probably in prison because I was the
worthless person in the family and
suddenly for the first time I'm feeling
like I want to get out of prison to help
my children not have the problems that I
had and not go and and not make the
mistakes that I made
um and so there's this enormous desire
on the part of a men to know that
they're valuable as fathers you know my
my sense as a clinical psychologist has
always been that
a kid has to have one role model
sometime in their life to to make it
they have to have someone to mimic or
they can't make it now you can get that
a variety of ways I remember reading
Angela's Ashes it's a great book by
Frank McCourt and his dad was a
recalcitrant alcoholic who drank the
family's livelihood and health away it
was awful
uh but he kind of separated his dad into
good dead and bad dad and bad dad was
drunk evening dad and good dad was sober
morning Dad and he got his mimicry from
good sober morning Dad you know so you
can you can pick it up in bits and
pieces from different places but if
you're
even if you have an intact nervous
system you know and you're not suffering
from burdens right at the point of your
birth from from deprivation that's that
began before you were even around
you need to have at least one model in
your life that shows you what the good
version of you could be because
otherwise how the hell do you know what
it is
and it needs to be embodied right so you
can see it play itself out so then you
can play with it
yes absolutely let me and let me to that
effect let me address the the females in
the audience here listening to this if
that are single moms and and what can
you do so the number one thing that that
you can do is take a look at the
differences between dad style parenting
and Mom style parenting because
oftentimes the things that dads do look
like they're not caring about the
children the things like teasing the
things like roughhousing the things that
letting the children take risks like you
know climbing the trees like we talked
about they all seem like
um this the tough love decisions are
often seen you see the toughness without
the love very frequently and so um
take a very careful look at that make
sure that if you're still if they still
have the dad at all around or available
that you get into family dinner night
discussions where everybody
learns how to listen to everybody else's
perspective in the family learn how to
do a negotiating of that that checks and
balance parenting but if it's absolutely
impossible to get the biological father
involved and I'm afraid that the
biological father children do better
with the biological father than they do
with a stepfather mostly step parent
elevates risk for abuse by a
hundred-fold if I remember correctly
it's a very
stepfathers almost always are never
allowed to be more than advisors if you
do have a stepfather work on that issue
that I talk about in the boy Crisis book
on how to engage the SEC The Stepfather
as a real equal assuming that he's a
responsible and loving man but if all
those things fail make sure you get your
child and at the age appropriate time
into Cub Scouts Cub Scouts involve
children involved in Cub Scouts for two
or more years have a very significant
increase in character development over
children that are involved in Cub Scouts
minimally and or not at all Boy Scouts
are a wonderful construct deconstruction
of masculinity they've really figured
out how to bring out the best in boys
faith-based communities children who are
in faith-based communities make sure
your faith-based leader gets your son
involved with other in small groups with
other boys his age and make sure he he
encourages your son to be um and all the
boys in the group to talk about their
feelings and their fears so that they
can see that they're not alone in those
feelings and fears make sure your
children are involved in the what I call
the liberal arts of sports but by the
liberal arts of sports I mean team
sports
also pick up team sports uh which uh and
and also Sports where you have to
develop your own skills it's you're part
of a team like in gymnastics or in
tennis
um but you're not uh interacting with
the team all the time each of those
things will develop and your son
different types of skill sets the most
important one that oftentimes moms don't
realize the value of is the value of
pickup team sports let your son or
daughter be at a at a at the school
without your supervision let them pick
up a game where they have to decide
without somebody supervising them how
big the court should be at the
basketball court should be should be
half size full size what are the fouling
rules who do you check
it's perfect
developmental skills for being an
entrepreneur and being being able to
make decisions without supervision
obviously team sports are pretty obvious
what their benefits are and um and be
developing skills with that that aren't
dependent on this team are part of the
liberal arts of sports so spend time in
the boy Crisis book with looking at what
you can do as a single as a single yeah
well one of the things I liked about
your books and and why men earn more as
well is that they're they're full of
information but they're also practical
and they have practical advice here's
things you can actually do which is
something people apparently appreciate
about my books so it's nice to have it
detailed down to the level of action I
want to close because I know we're we've
exhausted you
um what why did you receive such I would
like to know why you think you didn't
get more traction with the Trump people
but then I would like you to tell me
what's up with the Democrats why didn't
you get why did you get rejected so out
of hand when you put forward these
perfectly reasonable propositions which
in principle should be in accordance
with what they're claiming to support
yes even the Trump people this is what
I'm going to say now is 10 times tenfold
this issue with the Biden people but
even the Trump people were fearful that
the single mother would feel criticized
and they were afraid of losing that the
support from her and um and so that was
that was what I heard behind the scenes
was the the gap between
um it being very much recommended by the
people that I spoke with versus actually
having a a presentation delivered by
Trump the other thing was that they were
fearful that it would it would call
attention to Trump's failed marriages
and um and his his womanizing and they
didn't want to open that door so those
were the two okay
from the Biden side um it was like it
was well the best example of this is
what I went to Iowa and I interviewed um
nine of the presidential candidates that
were Democrats and most of them were are
very excited especially Andrew Yang and
Senator Hickenlooper John Hickenlooper
we're very excited about what I was
saying Andrew Yang already had a Mastery
of what was um what the problems were
with boys he was on the tip of maybe
being able potentially to talk about the
issue
um while when I finished talking with
both Andrew Yang and um and Hickenlooper
especially with Andrew Yang the female
campaign manager came up to me and said
I'm sorry Warren we just could not have
him talk about these issues this will
alienate our feminist base this will
alienate women who are single moms it
will not and we want we want also many
of the women who are divorced we want
them not to feel that they won't have
the choice of going off and starting a
new life and bringing their children to
a new location with a new man and so we
were afraid of losing that bait those
two yes well into hell with the old man
yes and so it was really
um and that they were honest with me
that's the good news the bad news is
they were you know that
um this was the case and so with when
the Biden Administration
um created the White House gender policy
Council which was a day or two before he
was actually inaugurated
um the um and it was focused on you know
women and girls and um you know and and
both black women and girls and white
women and girls I protested and um and
talked with Jen Klein who's the co-chair
about this uh many times and her only
answer over and over again is Warren
um President Biden cares about men and
boys Warren President Biden cares about
the fathers and my response is my my
constant hammering of her about well
then then it should be written into the
White House gender policy Council to
create these father Warrior programs to
create these um these programs of dozens
of which I suggested uh that could
increase and improve the lives of boys
and men and I was met with
no answer
like just so what what's the problem
what's the problem as far as you're
concerned we might as well have it write
out what the hell's going on in in Jen
Klein's case and in the um in the in the
feminist uh in the the liberal political
leadership and the Democrats it is just
a fundamentally and totally honest
belief that
um women have it worse than men that
boys and men and the the constant image
that comes up for the political liberals
is Warren right so it's the Gen it's the
classification of the World by sex
that's the problem it isn't who has
problems and how do we help them it's
it's the classification first in the
problem second it's we live in a
patriarchal World dominated by men who
made the rules to benefit men at the
expense of women the proof of that one
is that um look at who's at the top of
the political ladder look at who's the
top of the corporate better look at
who's the top of even the religious life
right so it's right back to where we
started which is identify that tiny
minority of men who are hyper successful
generalize that to the masculine uh
Universe At Large and to hell with those
that are in the middle or the bottom
which is so what is that hypergamy in
female politics is it the same thing and
it's it is not the realization that the
men at the top
are often at the top they're earning
that more money not because they feel
more fulfilled or this is their choice
they felt obligated to earn money that
somebody else spent while they died
sooner right so it's not even true for
the people who have the privilege much
less true for men anywhere else on the
hierarchy correct and when I say to them
things like you know it isn't male
privilege do you consider it male
privilege for every
um generation during their War to train
the boys and the men uh to be the ones
that died in war so that you could be
protected and saved and it's just like
closed mouth what about the um the
legislation that's become a real issue
in Korea yeah South Korea oh actually I
didn't know that oh yes yes there are no
shortage of men who are not thrilled
about the fact that they are conscripted
for two years and the women aren't now
you know my sense is well the women pay
their dues in childbirth and and
pregnancy and you know but nonetheless
it's it's an issue and it's producing no
shortage of resentment and friction
among young Koreans
and here in the United States you know
it's still the law
um which is probably the most
unconstitutional law that most violates
the 14th amendment's equal protection
and laws it is still the law of the
United States that your son who's 18
must register for the draft if he
doesn't
um he's could be fined a quarter million
dollars he could be put in prison for a
year or two he can he'll in 42 states he
can lose his driver's license if he
doesn't register for the draft
um and there's a whole series of other
he could never go to a school that gets
Federal money which is virtually every
school including private schools this is
all the punishment that men have male
your son has if he's 18 and doesn't
register for the draft the punishment
for females is zero because they don't
have to register for the draft they have
the option so what do you think of that
Warren like the the old-fashioned
patriarchal part of me thinks
I think two ways at the same time you
know unfortunately about that I think
you know
I do believe to some degree that that's
the balancing of the scales you know
that as you pointed out in your own book
you know men die in war and women die in
childbirth now they don't die in
childbirth so much anymore but they did
and and in in great numbers and was
terrible pain and and and all of the
privation that went along with that
obligatory responsibility tremendous
amount of that has been ameliorated not
all of it but a tremendous amount thank
God for technological progress and so
but
but having said that well it doesn't sit
well the idea of women drafted for
Frontline combat doesn't sit well with
me yes and I think there's an answer to
that which is we don't have to draft
people for Frontline combat they're
they're men that are not suited to that
there are women that are not suited to
that but but I think it's a good
solution would be either you don't have
registration for the draft which creates
a different set of problems and not
having a ready
um group ready but say you but you have
people register at the age of 18 for
some type of service of say six months
or more and and and then you you mark
off the type of service that your
personality that you're that your um
contribution can make it could be a
health care Frontline worker you can be
a volunteer in this way or that way so
if there's mandatory service it's
mandatory for all but the service itself
can differ and and and everyone could
have some choice in that and who knows
maybe there'd be enough people picked
Frontline combat to fill the necessary
places it's possible I mean there are
people who are constitutionally inclined
towards that and if there isn't enough
people for that then you do a supply and
demand type of phenomenon you raise the
income for the people who do um
volunteer right right right which would
be that would right exactly that would
be the Equitable way of dealing with it
is is increase the hazard pay yes
exactly right and you'd watch the
demanding you'd watch the supply
increase exactly because there'd be
people who are right on the line right
right on the edge exactly right right
right
any final things to say yeah I guess
maybe the most important thing I'd like
us to all get is that there are so many
things like hashtag me too that are so
valuable
um for us to hear the pain and the
experience that women go through but
hashtag metoo as a monologue
is a disaster because it needs to be a
dialogue yeah just like it needs to be a
dialogue between men and women in a
family exactly we need to hear that that
men have pain men have all these these
you know the the 50 plus developmental
challenges that I talk about that men
feel um lonely isolated that men why men
suffer more um because when and because
one thing we need to do it just for
compassion secondly there's so many
misunderstandings and anger that is
happening by we say on the one hand men
are we have toxic masculinity
um they don't express their feelings
they don't say who they are and then we
we make men pay an enormous price when
they do Express their feelings and so so
many young men feel caught between a
rock and a hard place yes well I would
say that's happened in my case you know
because I have this unfortunate
proclivity to burst into tears at the
slightest provocation which has haunted
me my entire life but is still quite
pronounced and it isn't exactly obvious
to me that you know my radical left-wing
critics are above using that as a weapon
it's quite interesting to note you know
and maybe they're justified in doing so
I'm not saying that that's but that's it
runs contrary to their hypothetical
theory yes yes exactly and you know and
I've said man after Man by the way I
have that exact same characters if my if
my wife were here listening now she'd be
really chuckling because
um anything that is you know what I had
to hold myself back when I was talking
about the memory of the of the men in
the prison population coming up to me
afterwards and themselves crying
um right right yeah I think he just
about got me there too uh interesting
the hashtag V2 dialogue is is so
important not just for empathy but also
because to to eradicate the toxic part
of masculinity that keeps feelings all
to oneself because when you do that you
end up having a volcano built inside of
you and it comes out as the anger it
comes out as distance it comes out as
drinking it comes out in destructive
behavior and it also comes out in things
like school shootings mass shootings
committing crimes and so both to protect
ourselves from the mass shootings from
the Isis recruits almost all of whom are
dead deprived males and females and also
Adams can you do data is there data on
that one with regards to recruitment for
yes there is in fact it was done um by
three sociologists who looked at um the
studied Isis recruits in Lebanon and
after doing that they anecdotally told
each other afterwards you know a lot of
these these guys have um don't have
their dads and they were trying to get
involved with Isis to have some sense of
purpose Beyond themselves and well it
was never part of our questionnaire they
went back and then did a systematic
study of the men asking including that
question that had not been asked at the
beginning and found that to be the
single most common denominator of the
Isis recruits by the way there's 89 male
Isis recruits at 11 female Isis recruits
and the females had dad deprivation as
an issue as well as the males as the
single biggest um characteristic
patriarchal ideology has a substitute
for paternal relationship yes yes
absolutely and just a need to have some
sense of purpose and feeling of being
needed and that's one of the things that
guys are so good at as working with moms
moms are so good at identifying a
child's gifts nurturing the child's
gifts and dads are so good at the tough
love often times that are necessary to
help the child
achieve those gifts yeah well I thought
you know it seems to me that the central
characteristic of the benevolent
paternal Spirit parodied as the
patriarchy is encouragement
oh encourage well I would I say I think
I take a little bit of a different issue
there I think moms and dads both
encourage a lot
um but moms oftentimes uh repeat the
encouragement and when the child fails
are still encouraging whereas the dads
say if you want to get to that outcome
you need to not do that texting you need
not to you know do all the things that
that outcome requires and they tend to
sort of enforce those boundaries and
hold the child accountable to a greater
degree does that make sense sure sure
that's thank you very much for talking
with me today it's just much much
appreciated you don't exhaust me you
energize me I just oh well okay glad to
hear that and I hope that I hope that
everybody finds this conversation useful
thank you thanks again thank you you too
[Music]
thank you